LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina I

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina II

Henk Borgdorﬀ

The Conflict
of the Faculties
Perspe ives on Artistic
Research and Academia

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina III

The conflict of disciplines
is not a brake on the
development of science,
but one of its motors.
Bruno Latour

Leiden University Press

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina IV

The publication of this book is made possible by a grant from
University of the Arts, e Hague
Academy of Creative and Performing Arts, Leiden University
Faculty of Fine, Applied and Performing Arts, University of Gothenburg
Cover design and layout: Mulder van Meurs, Amsterdam
isbn
e-isbn
NUR

978 90 8728 167 0
978 94 0060 099 7 (pdf )
640 / 651

© H. Borgdorff / Leiden University Press, 2012
All rights reserved. Without limiting the rights under copyright
reserved above, no part of this book may be reproduced, stored in
or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form
or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording
or otherwise) without the written permission of both the copyright
owner and the author of the book.

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina V

To Barbara and Hans

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina VI

Contents

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina VII

Acknowledgements and Provenance of the Chapters

viii

Introduction

1

1

The Conflict of the Faculties

14

2

The Debate on Research in the Arts

28

3

Artistic Research and Academia: An Uneasy Relationship

56

4

Artistic Research within the Fields of Science

74

5

Where Are We Today? The State of the Art in
Artistic Research

104

6

Artistic Research as Boundary Work

128

7

The Production of Knowledge in Artistic Research

140

8

Boundary Work: An Interview

174

9

Artistic Practices and Epistemic Things

184

10

Ingredients for the Assessment of Artistic Research

200

11

The Case of the Journal for Artistic Research

214

Bibliography

242

Index

260

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina VIII

Acknowledgements and
Provenance of
the Chapters

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina IX

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina X

My earliest thoughts about research in the arts began to take on more
tangible form ten years ago when I was involved in developing the masters programme in music at the Conservatorium van Amsterdam and
in setting up the practice-based doctorate programme docartes. This
book can be read as a written account of an expedition that has occupied a good deal of my working life ever since – the exploratory and
preparatory work for the artistic research agenda, and its eventual realisation. During my expedition, I have known and met many people
who were working along with me towards those goals or who have supported, encouraged, or redirected my efforts. My heartfelt thanks is due
to all of them.
Starting in 2002, the Amsterdam School of the Arts (ahk) gave
me the opportunity to put research on the agenda in terms of both content and infrastructure, in an environment that was not yet fully
equipped for that purpose. It was a pleasure to lead the Art Research,
Theory and Interpretation (arti) research group, where staff and graduates from several ahk faculties and different artistic disciplines worked
together in a broad array of research projects, both practice-based and
more theoretical and conceptual. I have particularly good memories of
those times, which were an inspiration to me and to many others along
with me. Carel Alons and Marianne Gerner were the people in the ahk
administration who supported my efforts. arti members Scott deLahunta and Sher Doruff were more than just discussion partners
over the years. On the theoretical and political rationale of research in
an arts education framework, I had many enlightening exchanges with
my immediate colleagues Folkert Haanstra, Marijke Hoogenboom, and
Peter van Mensch, and also with Michiel Schuijer in an intellectual dialogue that has continued ever since the founding of the Dutch Journal
of Music Theory (djmt) in 1996.
Such exchanges also took place within the Forum of Professors
at Arts Schools (lok), in which I participated from its founding in 2002.
Early discussion partners were Joost Smiers (Utrecht School of the
Arts, hku) and Joep Bor (Codarts, Rotterdam), about a national school
for practice-based research in the arts (which has still not materialised).
Later productive dialogues were with Jeroen Boomgaard (Gerrit Rietveld Academie and University of Amsterdam, UvA) regarding the Artis-

x

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina XI

tic Research masters programme at the UvA; with Geert Lovink (UvA
and Amsterdam University of Applied Sciences, HvA) on art in a contemporary culture that is networked through new and social media;
Bart van Rosmalen (Royal Conservatoire, The Hague) on the conferences we organised together; Henk Slager (Utrecht School of the Arts),
whom I regularly meet at conferences everywhere in Europe, but never
in the city we both live in; Peter Peters (Zuyd University), who recently,
given our shared backgrounds, inspired me to explore the field of science and technology studies; and Peter Sonderen (ArtEZ Institute of
the Arts), with whom I recently edited a volume of essays entitled
Denken in kunst: Theorie en reflectie in het kunstonderwijs. Like my arti
research group, the lok also provided an environment where I could
regularly ‘try out’ my papers and presentations.
My involvement in docartes was vital to my explorations in the
field of artistic research. Together with Peter Dejans, Johan Huys (Orpheus Institute, Ghent) and Frans de Ruiter (Academy of Creative and
Performing Arts, Leiden University; then also of the University of the
Arts The Hague), I worked on the development of the docartes programme. Their leadership and unflagging energy ultimately resulted in
the creation of an international doctorate programme for musicians that
is now regarded as exemplary far beyond the Low Countries. The exchanges of ideas I had with the doctoral students, and with Peter, Johan, and Frans, during the monthly two-day sessions were for me a
hands-on learning experience in practice-based research in music. It was
my privilege to moderate the student discussions and conduct seminars
on the theory of science. I also better got to know Marcel Cobussen
(Leiden University), who teaches aesthetics and philosophy at docartes. For quite some time, we facilitated the collegia, where doctoral
candidates reported on and discussed their ongoing research projects.
Marcel and I spoke continuously about the rationale of artistic research.
Although I was not always persuaded by his poststructuralist take on
the subject, the exchanges heightened my need to eventually come to
terms with that strand of philosophy. Marcel and I collaborated in 2007
as editors of a special issue of djmt on practice-based research in music, to which he contributed a fine essay explaining his perspective on
artistic research and academia.

xi

Acknowledgements and Provenance of the Chapters

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina XII

Working from the Orpheus Institute in Ghent, the site of docartes, Peter Dejans has built a strong international network that facilitates the exchange of knowledge and experiences relating to practicebased doctoral programmes. I learned a great deal from the critical
dialogues in midas (Musical Institutions with Doctoral Arts Studies) and
the think-tank empar (Enquiry into Musical Practice as Research),
and later I also profited from Peter’s efforts for the third-cycle working
group within the Polifonia project of the European Association of Conservatoires (aec). I also hope to benefit from his current work for the
Polifonia working group on artistic research and for the European Platform for Artistic Research in Music (eparm), both under aec auspices.
This international network enabled me to meet Darla Crispin and Jeremy Cox (London/Ghent), Brinley Yare (London), Henry Stobart
(London), Jonathan Cross (Oxford), Celia Duffy and Stephen Broad
(Glasgow), Harold Jörgenson (Oslo), Magnus Eldenius and Eva Nässen
(Gothenburg), Johannes Johansson (Stockholm), Håkan Lundström
(Malmö), Kari Kurkela (Helsinki), Urve Lippus (Tallinn), Yves Knockaert (Leuven), Héctor Perez (Valencia), as well as other people, all of
whom helped me develop my thinking about research.
After a presentation I made in Berlin in October 2005 at the
‘re:search in and through the Arts’ conference, convened by the European League of Institutes of the Arts (elia), I came into contact with
many people who, in conversations and correspondence, were to support and critically accompany my expedition in the years to follow: Efva
Lilja (University College of Dance and Circus, Stockholm), Søren
Kjørup and Nina Malterud (Bergen National Academy of the Arts),
Ólöf Gerður Sigfúsdóttir (Iceland Academy of the Arts), Christoph
Schenker, Corina Caduff, and Anton Rey (Zurich University of the
Arts), Christopher Bannerman (Middlesex University), Martin Tröndle (Zeppelin University, Friedrichshafen), Michael Biggs (University of
Hertfordshire), Henrik Karlsson (Riksbankens Jubileumsfond, Stockholm), Janet Ritterman (Royal College of Music, London, and Austrian
Science Board), and many more. With Johan Haarberg (Norwegian
Artistic Research Fellowship Programme), an intellectual exchange
about the agenda of artistic research began which has developed into
a friendship.

xii

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina XIII

Since 2009, my post at the University of the Arts The Hague has
allowed me to devote myself to the further exploration and realisation
of the programme of artistic research. The appointment has brought
me back to a familiar environment in the Royal Conservatoire (kc) and
Leiden University. I had taught music theory and musical aesthetics
at the kc from 1990 to 1994, and earlier I had studied in both institutions. In The Hague I met my colleague Janneke Wesseling, who had
just launched PhDArts, a new doctorate programme for visual artists
and designers; and in Leiden I got to know Kitty Zijlmans, who, with
Frans de Ruiter, has supported me in completing this book project.
I hope to be able to continue my expedition with Janneke, Frans, and
Kitty in The Hague and Leiden for many years to come. I am also
grateful to Henk van der Meulen and Martin Prchal (Royal Conservatoire) for the latitude they have permitted me to finish the book
project, as well as to the members of the research focus group at the
kc for the critical dialogue about the hows and whats of research in
music education settings.
My work since 2009 with Michael Schwab (Royal College of Art,
London) and Florian Dombois (then of the Bern, now of the Zurich
University of the Arts) has been of tremendous influence on the final
leg of my expedition that I report on in this book. We have collaborated in planning and establishing the Journal for Artistic Research and
the Society for Artistic Research, as well as on the Artistic Research Catalogue (arc) project. Altogether, these have generated an active discursive field in which the programme of artistic research is being explored and brought to fruition, in both theory and practice. The
concluding chapter of my book is a written account of that effort. My
almost daily contacts with Michael about the conceptual and material
aspects of those undertakings have helped to sustain me in my expedition. Michael has not only become a partner in crime; he is also one
of those people with whom one connects strongly at an intellectual
level. Innumerable conversations in the Editorial Board of the Journal
(with Annette Arlander, Barnaby Drabble, Mika Elo, Nicola Foster, Julian Klein, and Michael Schwab) and in the Executive Board of the Society (with Barbara Bolt, Darla Crispin, Florian Dombois, Gerhard
Eckel, Kim Gorus, Rolf Hughes, Anna Lindal, George Petelin, and

xiii

Acknowledgements and Provenance of the Chapters

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina XIV

Stephen Scrivener) have deepened my understanding of the dynamics
of the new field of research. At the University of Gothenburg, where I
have been spending part of my time since 2010, I have enjoyed support
and critical guidance from Anna Lindal, Johan Öberg, Sverker Jullander, Anna Frisk, the members of the research council of the Academy
of Music and Drama, and many others.
The voices of philosophers who held the Spinoza chair at the University of Amsterdam in the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries can be discerned now and then throughout the book. Seminars
and staff colloquia conducted by Richard Rorty, Stanley Cavell, Hilary
Putnam, and Hubert Dreyfus made a lasting impression on me and
have had some ramifications for my explorations. In some chapters, the
voices of Theodor W. Adorno and Ludwig Wittgenstein can also be
heard. At the UvA I had a far too brief encounter with Ruth Sonderegger that enabled me to exchange some thoughts with her about
the promise of the artistic research programme. Her move to Vienna
has occasioned a pause in our dialogue, but hopefully not an end to it.
This book is about transformations – the transformation of
artistic practices to artistic research, and the transformation of academia to a domain that also provides a place for non-discursive forms of
knowledge, unconventional research methods and enhanced modes of
presentation and publication. Yet the book could never have been
written without the transformations made by my translator, Michael
Dallas. His translations, often accompanied by intensive consultations, helped me better understand what I did and did not mean to say.
If the published articles have had a certain impact, then that owes in
large part to their articulate English. I thank Michael for his devoted,
conscientious work.
Chapter 1, ‘The Conflict of the Faculties’, has not been published before in its present form. Parts of it appeared as ‘On Theory, Practice and
Research in Professional Art Academies’ in The Reflexive Zone: Research
into Theory in Practice, edited by Anke Coumans and Helen Westgeest
(Utrecht: Utrecht School of the Arts), 2004, pp. 117-24; and in Dutch
as ‘De strijd der faculteiten: Over zin en onzin van onderzoek in de kunsten’ [The Conflict of the Faculties: On Sense and Nonsense of Re-

xiv

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina XV

search in the Arts] in Boekman (special issue, Kunst en Wetenschap),
58/59 (Spring 2004), pp. 191-96. The final part of the chapter was published in the Dutch newspaper nrc Handelsblad as ‘Emancipatie “faculteit der kunsten” nodig’ [Emancipation of ‘Arts Faculties’ Needed],
29 September 2005, Opiniepagina section, p. 9.
Chapter 2, ‘The Debate on Research in the Arts’, was published
in 2006 in the Sensuous Knowledge series, 02 (Bergen: Bergen National Academy of the Arts), and reprinted in 2007 in the Dutch Journal for Music Theory, 12.1, pp. 1-17. It was published in Dutch as ‘Het
debat over onderzoek in de kunsten’ in De theatermaker als onderzoeker,
edited by Maaike Bleeker and others (Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press), 2006, pp. 21-39. It was published in German as ‘Die Debatte über Forschung in der Kunst’ in Künstlerische Forschung: Positionen und Perspektiven, edited by Anton Rey and Stefan Schöbi
(Zurich: Institute for the Performing Arts and Film, Zurich University of the Arts), 2009, pp. 23-51. A Spanish translation ‘El debate sobre la investigación en las artes’ appeared in cairon: Revista de estudios de danza [Journal of Dance Studies] (Madrid: Universidad de
Alcalá), 13 (2010), pp. 25-46.
Chapter 3, ‘Artistic Research and Academia: An Uneasy Relationship’, was published in Autonomi och egenart: Konstnärlig forskning
söker identitet [Autonomy and Individuality: Artistic Research Seeks an
Identity], Årsbok KFoU 2008 [Yearbook for Artistic Research and
Development] (Stockholm: Swedish Research Council), pp. 82-97.
Chapter 4, ‘Artistic Research within the Fields of Science’, was
published in its present form in 2009 in the Sensuous Knowledge series, 06 (Bergen: Bergen National Academy of the Arts). Parts of the
article were published earlier in German as ‘Der Modus der Wissensproduktion in der künstlerischen Forschung’ in Wissen in Bewegung, edited by Sabine Gehm, Pirkko Husemann, and Katharina von
Wilcke (Bielefeld: Transcript), 2007, pp. 73-80; and in English as
‘Artistic Research and Pasteur’s Quadrant’ in gray Magazine, 3 (special issue, Artistic Research) (Amsterdam: Gerrit Rietveld Academy),
2007, pp. 12-17; as well as in Close Encounters: Artists on Artistic Research, edited by Erna Grönlund and others, Rapportserien Dans:
Forskning och utveckling [Dance: Research and Development Series],

xv

Acknowledgements and Provenance of the Chapters

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina XVI

2 (Stockholm: University College of Dance), 2007, pp. 12-17. The entire chapter was published in Dutch as ‘Artistiek onderzoek in het geheel der wetenschappen’ in Krisis: Tijdschrift voor actuele filosofie, 1
(2009), pp. 65-70.
Chapter 5, ‘Where Are We Today: The State of the Art in Artistic Research’ was first published in Forskning och kritik: Granskning och
recension av konstnärlig forskning [Research and Criticism: Reviewing
Artistic Research], Årsbok KFoU 2010 [Yearbook for Artistic Research
and Development] (Stockholm: Swedish Research Council), pp. 17-31.
A slightly altered version was published in Kunst und Forschung: Können Künstler Forscher sein?, edited by Janet Ritterman, Gerald Bast, and
Jürgen Mittelstraß (Vienna: Springer), 2011, pp. 57-79. A German
translation, ‘Wo stehen wir in der künstlerischen Forschung?’, was provided in the same volume, pp. 29-55.
Chapter 6, ‘Artistic Research as Boundary Work’, was published
in Art and Artistic Research, edited by Corina Caduff, Fiona Siegenthaler,
and Tan Wälchli, Zurich Yearbook of the Arts 2009 (Zurich: Scheidegger und Spiess), pp. 72-79. It was published in German in the same
yearbook as ‘Künstlerische Forschung als Grenzarbeit’, pp. 78-87.
Chapter 7, ‘The Production of Knowledge in Artistic Research’,
was published in The Routledge Companion to Research in the Arts, edited by Michael Biggs and Henrik Karlsson (London: Routledge),
2011, pp. 44-63. Parts of the chapter were published in German as
‘Künstlerische Forschung und akademische Forschung’ in Kunstforschung als ästhetische Wissenschaft: Beiträge zur transdisziplinären Hybridisierung von Wissenschaft und Kunst, edited by Martin Tröndle and
Julia Warmers (Bielefeld: Transcript), 2012, pp. 69-90.
Chapter 8, ‘Boundary Work: An Interview’, was published as
‘Boundary Work: Henk Borgdorff interviewed by Michael Schwab’ in
Intellectual Birdhouse: Art Practice as Research, edited by Florian Dombois, Ute Meta Bauer, Claudia Mareis, and Michael Schwab (London:
Koenig Books), 2012, pp. 117-23.
Chapter 9, ‘Artistic Practices and Epistemic Things’, will be part
of a volume entitled Experimental Systems: Future Knowledge in Artistic
Research, edited by Michael Schwab, Orpheus Research Centre in Music Series (Leuven: Leuven University Press), forthcoming in 2013.

xvi

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina XVII

Chapter 10, ‘Ingredients for the Assessment of Artistic Research’,
was written for the present volume and is not to be published elsewhere.
Chapter 11, ‘The Case of the Journal for Artistic Research’, forms
the basis for a chapter in The Exposition of Artistic Research: Publishing
Art in Academia, edited by Michael Schwab and Henk Borgdorff (Leiden: Leiden University Press), forthcoming in 2012.

Amsterdam, January 2012

xvii

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina XVIII

Introduction

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina 1

You won’t, for example, tell us,
nor could you possibly tell us,
what the criteria are by which
we know which uses of
‘know’ in the future will be
legitimate or rational ….
Hilary Putnam

The content of a science [is]
the reconfiguration of the
world … through practical
engagement with things,
people, and prior patterns of
talk.
Joseph Rouse*

* Hilary Putnam, Pragmatism (Oxford: Blackwell, 1995), p. 32. Joseph Rouse, ‘Vampires:
Social Constructivism, Realism, and Other Philosophical Undead’, History and Theory, 41
(2002), 60-78 (p. 73).

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina 2

This book is about artistic research – what it is, or what it
could be. And it is about the place that artistic research
could have in academia, within the whole of academic
research. It is also about the ways we speak about such
issues, and about how the things we say (in this book and
elsewhere) cause the practices involved to manifest themselves in specific ways, while also setting them into motion.
In this sense, the book not only explores the phenomenon
of artistic research in relation to academia, but it also
engages with that relationship. This performative dimension
of the book is interwoven with its constative and interpretive dimensions. If the book succeeds in its aims, it will
not only advance knowledge and understanding of artistic
research, but it will further the development of this
emerging field. Such an articulation of artistic research, in
which thinking and doing are enmeshed, implies a certain
engagement. Though that might seem to stand in the way
of an objective assessment, there are good reasons to defend
the intertwinement of theoretical and practical agency, as I
shall make clear below.

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina 3

The field of endeavour that I articulate and analyse here is, as mentioned, artistic research in its relationship to academia. It is a field of
research under study, and my investigation can therefore be regarded
(to use an old expression) as metatheoretical, as metascientific, as
foundational research. It thereby situates itself in the domains of philosophy of science and science policy, in a field currently known as science and technology studies (sts). I would not go so far as to claim that
the research I present here forms a significant contribution to various
sts standpoints, nor that it adopts a stance in the sts debate. It can,
however, be regarded as an extensive case study in which I sometimes
partake of insights developed in the sts context. A thoroughgoing study
from an sts perspective has yet to be undertaken; a whole territory
awaits exploration.
The area covered by this book is limited. The focus is on artistic
research – that is, on an endeavour in which the artistic and the academic
are united. The field of artistic research thereby sets itself apart from
other encounters between the arts and academia. It is important to draw
a clear distinction between artistic research and other forms of art-science collaboration, where artists are outsiders, visitors, or participants
in scientific practice (cf. Zijlmans, Zwijnenberg, and Clevis 2007: 3334). Such relations between artists and scientists remain outside the scope
of this book, though I do refer to them in several chapters. My present
study focuses on an undertaking in which artistic practices contribute
as research to what we know and understand, and in which academia
opens its mind to forms of knowledge and understanding that are entwined with artistic practices.
A further delimitation concerns the book’s orientation. As the
subtitle announces, it is about artistic research and academia. Although artistic research is positioned at the interface of art and academia – at the place where the art world and the world of academic research meet – the book concentrates not primarily on the art world, on
issues in the domain of the arts, but on the relationship artistic research
might have to academic research. Obviously such topics cannot be
viewed in isolation from one another, and developments and critical issues arising in the art world will certainly come under discussion in various chapters. But the relationship between artistic research and the art

3

Introduction

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina 4

world still needs to be explicitly investigated by other studies. A historical study of artistic research, which is likewise yet to be written, will
not only have to uncover what factors – or better still, actors – have contributed to the rise of this research field, but it will also need to show
what developments immanent in art practice have fuelled its emergence.
The fact that I am confining myself to artistic research and academia may perhaps justify my slightly undifferentiated, or sometimes ostensibly uncritical, use of the term ‘art’ in various chapters.
Though I do distinguish here and there between different art practices
and disciplines where relevant, and though I do realise that, since the
historical avant garde, ‘nothing concerning art goes without saying’
(Adorno 1997 [1970]: 12), I do not pretend to make a sophisticated contribution to the history, theory, or criticism of art. At the same time, I
am also aware that the advent of artistic research does potentially influence how we think about ‘art’ (as well as about ‘academia’).
Besides being a field that is strongly proliferating, artistic research
is also a controversial matter. It is important to underline its disputed
status from the start, even before I discuss this with varying degrees of
emphasis in later chapters. Whether in the art world, in the arts education sector, or in the world of academic research, there are always people who react to artistic research with reserve, if not with scepticism or
outright rejection. As we shall see, their motives and arguments for so
doing differ greatly. I will highlight one such viewpoint straightaway,
since it could recently be heard once again in distinguished art circles.1
It involves the presumed disciplining effect of ‘academic’ artistic research. In contrast to disciplined academic research, it was argued, the
unregulated field of research in the arts exempts itself, as a matter of
principle, from standards, restrictions, and criteria – which naturally
could never arise out of the autonomous work of artists. The artistic
1. Kathrin Busch, ‘Generating Knowledge in the Arts: A Philosophical Daydream’, Texte
zur Kunst (special issue, Artistic Research), 20.82 (2011), 70-79. Cf. Michael Schwab’s
commentary in Schwab 2011b. See also Peter Geimer, ‘Das große Recherche-Getue in der
Kunst. Sollen Hochschulen “Master of Arts”-Titel und Doktorhüte für Malerei
verleihen?’, Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, 20 April 2011, Forschung und Lehre section,
p. N5. <http://www.hkb.bfh.ch/uploads/media/Das_grosse_Recherche-Getue_in_der_
Kunst.pdf>. Cf. Elke Bippus’s commentary in Bippus 2011.

4

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina 5

production of knowledge was seen to have potentially more in common
with speculative philosophy and the knowledge criticism it practises
than with scientific knowledge production. The institutionalised field
of artistic research was also accused of leaning strongly on an obsolete
concept of science or scientific rigour and of failing to take into account
recent insights from the sociology of science. It was warned, moreover,
with recourse to Heidegger, Foucault, Derrida, Deleuze, and Levinas,
that true artistic research should resist, as an independent form of
knowledge production, any kind of academisation. Through its focus
on the singular, the aesthetic-affective, the transgressive, the unforeseen,
artistic research should exemplify an alternative culture of knowledge.
The problem with this type of criticism is that it fabricates its
own object of criticism. It begins by constructing a caricature of artistic research in academia – it is disciplining, homogenising, restrictive,
conformist, naive. After that, it is no longer difficult to field a whole
line-up of post-Nietzschean witnesses to lambast those pernicious
practices, which are inimical to art and which, under pressure from an
equally maleficent education policy, are seen to have infected the art
world under the label ‘academisation’ in order to subject art practices
to their disciplining forces. Such argumentation often follows the same
pattern: first you create an antithesis between (inadequate) academic research and the liberating cognitive practices of artists, and then you go
on to defend the latter from unwarranted institutionalisation and normalisation.
This pattern is the mirror image of another sort of reasoning that
likewise posits an antithesis between artistic research and academic research. It is deployed to protect the realm of the sciences against an invasion by unfounded ideas and strategies that cannot withstand systematic scrutiny, even if they might be of value in the enigmatic
practices of artists. These defenders of science insist that the arts and
sciences, though perhaps close together at some points in history, still
remain two fundamentally different domains and practices, and that it
would be highly inappropriate to lump them together in a single
higher education and research framework.
It is one of my objectives in this book to counter some of these,
in my eyes, needless oppositions between artistic and academic research,

5

Introduction

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina 6

between art and academia. Clearly, these represent, at first sight, two
domains and traditions of human activity that are institutionally and
theoretically (and to some extent historically) segregated; no extensive
research is necessary to confirm that. Nor are there many people who
would claim that every expression of artistry is a form of scholarly research; those who do so tend not to be taken seriously in the discourse.
All this notwithstanding, it is in this emergent field of artistic research
that the domains of art and academia meet and intersect. At that very
junction, something significant happens that could influence how we
think, or might begin to think, about both domains.
At the same time, the warnings made by these critics ought to
be taken seriously. If we near the point where institutionalisation of
artistic research leads to curtailment or dilution of artistic practice, or
to an erosion of academic values and conventions, it is time to step on
the brake. And, now already, the way that institutionalisation has actually occurred in some places gives reason to watchfully monitor and
criticise how the field is developing. At present, that development is
characterised by a diversity of initiatives, models, and practices, not all
of which will prove equally fruitful. Yet such heterogeneity is inherent
in a field that is still in development and has not yet fully crystallised.
Establishing a new research field simply takes time – as well as sparking a lot of conflict. My motivation in writing The Conflict of the Faculties is to contribute to that struggle. It is not helpful when people give
up the struggle beforehand by ossifying the antithesis between artistic
and academic research. The challenge lies in exploring whether and how
artistic research could cohere with academic research.
So what is the current state of affairs in this research field, and
how do I position my contribution? In chapters 2 and 5, I attempt to
document the state of the art, but I can already disclose for now that
there actually is no ‘state of the art’. Any effort to provide a current
overview is undermined by the heterogeneity and dynamism of the research field. Owing to the stream of new developments, my own texts,
as compiled here, were in danger of being obsolete at publication. To
paraphrase Bruno Latour, it is a field in action. Viewed in a particular,
mainly institutional light, the research field has already been established
in some countries since the early 1990s. From a more theoretical per-

6

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina 7

spective, however, the field is still in a continuous state of flux and some
turmoil. The foundational debate has not yet led to a status quo. It may
indeed be inherent to the field of artistic research that such a status quo
cannot ultimately be achieved. I shall defend that possibility below.
A growing number of publications relating to the new field of
research – journal articles, books, conference proceedings, policy papers – are now seeing the light. But the number of studies that explicitly examine the relationship between artistic research and academia is
still scant. The voluminous ‘companion’ by Biggs and Karlsson (2011)
therefore represents a milestone, though it still covers a limited number of viewpoints. If something can presently be said about a state of
affairs, it is that there is a particular need for studies to illuminate the
new research field from the perspectives of sociology of science and history of science. I would definitely endorse Helga Nowotny’s appeal
(made in Biggs and Karlsson, p. xxii) to science and technology researchers to engage with the new field. I hope that my present volume
will also contribute towards this.
My own contribution to the field of artistic research and the associated debate may be roughly described using the terms clarification,
justification, and positioning. Particularly in the early chapters of the
book, I try to create some terminological and conceptual clarity regarding the phenomenon of artistic research. The theoretical and political rationale of this type of research is a theme that pervades all chapters, and I also attempt to situate artistic research within the academic
realm. The earlier publication of the articles incorporated here was also
part of an effort to promote the concrete establishment of the new research domain (more on this below).
The principal theme addressed by this book is: What are the
characteristics of artistic research? This general question breaks down
into a series of more specific questions, explored in different chapters.
a.
How can we differentiate artistic research practices from artistic
practices?
b.
What are the ontological, epistemological, and methodological
attributes of artistic research?
c.
How can the relationship between artistic research and academia
be characterised?

7

Introduction

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina 8

d.

What position does the artistic research programme occupy in
science and technology policy and classification?
e.
Under what terms does artistic research qualify as academic research?
f.
What are the similarities and differences between artistic research
and other academic research fields and how does artistic research
relate to other life domains?
g.
What criteria may we employ in assessing artistic research?
h.
How is such an assessment framework rendered into concrete
practice in a peer-reviewed journal?
The focus in the later chapters turns increasingly to the epistemology
of artistic research and the criteria for research assessment. Throughout the work, I urge the acceptance of artistic research as a fully fledged
research form, including institutional recognition.
My exploration of the theoretical and political rationale of artistic research is based in part on the study of texts, complemented by a
case study to test the artistic research assessment framework. Concrete
artistic research itself is not a focus of my study. The book is about artistic research – I do not discuss (analyse, interpret, criticise) specific research projects, though these do receive some attention in the literature
I treat. In the emergent field of artistic research, there is a significant
need to bring together exemplary research, to create a canon of projects that can serve as examples or mirrors for comparison or can qualify as paradigmatic. A new field of research usually evolves against the
backdrop of uncontroversial work to which one can have recourse –
which represents the research domain, as it were. The fact that no such
corpus of exemplifying research now exists gives pause for thought.
Does the establishment of artistic research as a new domain perhaps follow a different logic? Whatever the case, my present study should not
be seen as a contribution to that facet of the artistic research domain.
Although I am aware that a study on and about artistic research which
does not draw on concrete research is at risk of remaining an abstract
exercise, I believe my study helps to clarify, justify, and position artistic research within academia.
The sources I have consulted deal roughly with four domains:
artistic research, theory of science, philosophy, and research policy.

8

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina 9

(Policy documents and online resources are listed in a separate section
of the bibliography.) In studying the texts and other sources, I focus
not only on the theoretical and political rationale of artistic research,
but also (albeit less explicitly) on what academia is, on how we can
think about academic research against the background of the discourse
on artistic research. One aim of the book is therefore to make a contribution of my own to the current discourse about academia and the
future of academic research. In doing so, I do not position myself on
the outside, either by branding academic research beforehand as
flawed or by presupposing an opposition between artistic and academic
research, but I contribute from within – by showing that there are good
reasons to champion and bolster within academia the alternative culture of knowledge to which the cited critics refer. Here, too, there is
considerable work to be done. The challenge is to find and mobilise
allies at all levels within the world of academic research and the science
system – in theory and in practice, conceptually and strategically, for
the debate on values and criteria and for the material and procedural
infrastructures. Natural allies can be expected in the humanities and
social sciences, for instance in cultural studies and anthropology. But
beyond that, exchanges of ideas and research strategies with people
from areas like physics or engineering could also help strengthen the
enhanced and expanded culture of knowledge. As I shall discuss below, the emergence of newer forms of transdisciplinary and Mode 2 research may also be relevant. And clearly the new artistic research domain can and should be further sustained by insights emanating from
science and technology studies.
The study presented here consists mostly of chapters that have
been published earlier as articles in their own right. Only the final two
were written specifically for this book. The first two chapters explore
the territory covered by the study and provide a tentative characterisation of the emerging field of research. Chapters 3, 4, and 6 focus on various aspects of artistic research: the often uneasy relationship with academia, the place of artistic research in the wider realm of science and
technology, and its status on the borderlines between art and other life
domains, including science. Chapter 5 may be seen as a sort of intermediate tally on the state of the art in the emergent domain. In chap-

9

Introduction

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina 10

ter 7, I attempt to position artistic research within academic research
and as academic research. Under the notions of non-conceptualism, realism, and contingency, I also discuss in relation to artistic research a
number of more speculative viewpoints that have been mentioned in
passing in previous chapters. Such views invite additional brainwork.
In the interview in chapter 8, amongst other subjects I anticipate the
central theme of chapter 9: the status of artworks and art practices as
‘epistemic things’. In chapter 10, I draw together the insights gained so
far and mould them into a framework for assessing artistic research.
This framework is tested and put into operation in chapter 11, the case
study on the creation and functioning of the peer-reviewed Journal for
Artistic Research.
As noted, most chapters have been published before. Those publications have meanwhile had some effect on the international discourse
about the artistic research programme. One reason why I wrote them was
to promote the establishment of that programme in concrete initiatives.
That might explain the slightly combative and occasionally categorical
tone of some passages. Matters of fact and matters of concern are intermingled. That obliges me now to engage in some reflection about how
theoretical analysis relates to practical agency. Such reflection is not a secondary consideration; it goes to the very heart of the matter.
In addition to being an essay on artistic research (in relation to
academia), this book is also a project and a proposition. It is a project
in the literal sense of ‘that which is thrown forth’, and this is done with
a specific purpose: to achieve something in practice, to make a difference there. This performative dimension of the book, as I have pointed
out in the beginning, is interwoven with the discursive dimension.
Theories are not disinterested attempts to approach an ever-receding
practice, nor are they imperfect representations of a constant reality.
Theories, including ones about artistic research, co-constitute the
practices they address – just as there are no practices that are not permeated by theories and beliefs. This intertwinement between theory
and practice – acknowledged both in hermeneutics and in constructivism – is the departure point of my analysis in the first chapter. But
this relationship between theory and practice also figures in the entire
project of which this book forms a written account. No one, of course,
is the sole owner of the viewpoints advanced here, as any certificate of

10

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina 11

ownership bears traces of things that others have left behind in intertextual space. These shared viewpoints exert their performative force
on the practices they become involved with. This can be illustrated by
the interplay between the framework for assessing artistic research, as
developed in this book, and the peer review criteria employed in
practice by the Journal for Artistic Research. The unmistakable reality
of those criteria (sedimented in the peer review form that guides reviewers through the assessment process) cannot be seen in isolation
from the discursive practice articulated in the criteria. That discursive
practice has both unfolded within the assessment framework proposed
here and transformed itself into the peer review form. That double
transformation may serve to exemplify the paradox that this book, this
project, indeed this whole endeavour demonstrates. Theories exercise
their performative power on the very practices that are described by
those theories. Bruno Latour has shown how we can escape from this
paradox – or rather, from what perspective the paradox no longer manifests itself as a paradox. For indeed, the opposition between theory and
practice dissipates as soon as we learn to understand the dynamic of
the emergent field as a chain of transformations – in which something
that belongs at one moment to the ‘logical space of reasons’ (to use Wilfrid Sellars’s term) is set into operation at the next moment and becomes reality. Latour referred to this double ‘articulation’2 of the field
as ‘constructivist realism’ (Latour 1999: 135). Reality becomes more real
through our interpretations of reality. And if only because of that, the
present project is not a relativist undertaking. At first glance we seem
to be dealing with a double circle: that which is to be proved is already
assumed, and we test our assumptions in implementing them. In actual fact, however, this is not self-referential at all; it is a dynamic chain
of interactions, transformations, and articulations that may ultimately
produce more reality.
This book is also a proposition, in the literal sense of ‘a proposal
to do something’. It might go too far to designate what I have under2. Latour 1999: 303. ‘This term [articulation] occupies the position left empty by the
dichotomy between the object and the subject or the external world and the mind.
Articulation is not a property of human speech but an ontological property of the
universe. The question is no longer whether or not statements refer to a state of affairs,
but only whether or not propositions are well articulated.’

11

Introduction

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina 12

taken in this book as action research, although the chain of reflection
and intervention might certainly tempt one to do so. It is better to describe my work as a proposition3 to view reality differently, to offer an
alternative for what now exists, by connecting and mobilising ideas,
people, institutions, and material things. This makes my project resemble art practice itself (if indeed I may say so), since art practice likewise offers another perspective, or a perspective on the other. Such a perspective is fundamentally contingent. Things could be different, but
whether we succeed in fulfilling the proposition depends on how powerfully it is articulated. The artistic research programme is not a given;
it is itself a project and a proposition. It provides the opportunity,
‘through practical engagement with things, people, and prior patterns
of talk’ (Rouse 2002: 73), to look at artistic practices differently and to
articulate their epistemic potential. And precisely because we cannot say
‘what the criteria are by which we know which uses of “know” in the
future will be legitimate or rational’ (Putnam 1995: 32), there is room
here to propose an enriched and expanded epistemic culture. Articulating artistic research in academia therefore also amounts to a proposition to speak differently about academia, to reconfigure academia.
The earlier published texts that comprise most of this book came
about in a variety of circumstances. That explains differences in style,
tone, length, and structure. I have decided to include them here in their
original form, save some minor adaptations, in order to allow the context to resonate in the narrative, as it were. Occasionally, but not too
often, that context is specifically Dutch; if so I point that out.
The various texts do not follow on one another precisely, but they
overlap as tiles on a roof. Repetitions or paraphrasings may occur here
and there, for which I hope the reader will forgive me. Each chapter is
preceded by a small preface that briefly explains the context of its in3. Latour 1999: 309. ‘I do not use this term [proposition] in the epistemological sense of a
sentence that is judged to be true or false […], but in the ontological sense of what an
actor offers to other actors. The claim is that the price of gaining analytical clarity – words
severed from world and then reconnected by reference and judgment – is greater and
produces, in the end, more obscurity than granting entities the capacity to connect to one
another through events.’

12

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina 13

ception and may link it to preceding or subsequent texts. This might
seem to divorce the context from the content; but, as I have pointed
out, the context also resonates through the text. And, just as theory and
practice, the discursive and the performative, are interwoven, so should
the distinction between content and context be de-emphasised here.
The texts were written between 2004 and 2011. Not only did the
field of artistic research expand decisively during that time, but the terminology used to describe it also shifted. Although this is explained
in subsequent chapters, I should point out here, to avoid misunderstandings, that the expression ‘artistic research’ is used here synonymously with ‘research in the arts’ (as contrasted with ‘research on the
arts’). Some shifts have occurred, too, in my own thinking about artistic research as well as in my perspective on artistic research and academia. For that reason, I provide annotations alongside the texts of all
chapters but the last two; these contain either my own comments and
elaborations on the adjacent passages or a kind of stage directions to
aid in following the book’s line of reasoning. Together with the short
prefaces explaining the context, the annotations may be regarded as a
sort of metatext that further articulates my perspective on artistic research and academia.

13

Introduction

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina 14

Chapter 1

The Conflict
of the Faculties
On theory, practice and
research in professional
arts academies

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina 15

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina 16

Context
This opening chapter signals the beginning (in the
Netherlands at least) of the debate on research in the arts.
It contains the text of a lecture I delivered at the expert
meeting ‘Kunst als Onderzoek’ (Art as Research), held at
Amsterdam’s Felix Meritis centre on 6 February 2004.
It also marks the creation of a new type of professorial
chair known as lectoraat at the Dutch universities of the
arts. In my research group Art Research, Theory and
Interpretation (arti) at the Amsterdam School of the
Arts, the rationale of artistic research – and in particular
the relationship between theory and practice in the arts
and in arts education – was a subject of lively debate.
The third part of the chapter, which urges institutional
recognition for artistic research, was published in abridged
form on 29 September 2005 in the Dutch newspaper nrc
Handelsblad, under the title ‘Emancipatie “faculteit der
kunsten” nodig’ (Emancipation of ‘Arts Faculties’
Needed). Later, in 2010, the Netherlands Organisation
for Scientific Research (nwo) funded a modest pilot
project for two practice-based PhD studentships in fine
art and design.

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina 17

This chapter develops a line of reasoning containing three elements:
1. To understand what research in the arts inSubsequent chapters will focus
volves, we must be fully aware of the tension and more closely on the specificity of
interaction between artistic practice and theoret- the knowledge embodied in art
ical reflection which are characteristic of the cre- and on the methodological heterogeneity of artistic research.
ative and performing arts.
The opposition I implied here
2. Contrary to widespread belief, the unique na- between ‘cognitive’ and ‘artistic’
ture of knowledge in art (as compared to more is unfortunate, as the artistic itself – both the creative faculties
conventional forms of scholarly knowledge) does and the aesthetic experience –
not justify any unique methodology of research. should be considered to belong
‘Art knowledge’, as embodied in the practices to the domain of the cognitive.
It would be better here to counand products of art, is ac- terpose the artistic to the conTwo strands of thought, or ‘agencessed by artistic research ceptual, rather than to the cognidas’, pervade all the chapters of
through both cognitive and tive (cf. chapter 2, page 48).
this book: the agendas of theoretical comprehension and political
artistic means.
justification. Or more correctly,
3. Research in the arts is of
the emergence of the field of
artistic research is characterised
equal value to research on the arts, and should
by the intertwinement of these
therefore be treated equally at the institutional level.
two agendas. Ideas are mobilised
and put into action, and they exert their performative force on
institutions and situations. Institutions and situations, along
with people and instruments, are
brought to bear to make ideas
happen. This constructivist realism (Latour) is characterised by
contingency: it is a proposal to
reinterpret and reconfigure the
state of art and academia.

Theory and practice

To understand what artistic research is, it is vital
to explore the relationships between practice and
theory in the arts. By outIn chapter 2, these four perspeclining four ideal-typical tives will translate into three
(but not mutually exclu- perspectives on research in the
sive) perspectives on the re- arts. In research where artistic
practice serves as both a method
lation between […] theory and an epistemological resource,
and practice, I will try to the performative and immanent
elucidate and refine the various viewpoints one perspectives merge together.
Artistic practices and artworks
can encounter in the world of higher arts educa- are both instruments and outtion. I distinguish (a) the instrumental perspective, comes here.
(b) the interpretive perspective, (c) the performative perspective and (d) the immanent perspective.
a) The instrumental perspective suggests that ‘theory’ serves the creative
process or performance practice in the arts. This viewpoint, predomi-

17

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina 18

nant in professional arts schools, understands theory first of all as a body
of technical professional knowledge. Each art discipline thus has its own
‘theory’ – instrumental knowledge specific to the craft, needed to practise the art form in question. Examples are the theory of editing in film,
the theory of harmony and counterpoint in music, or Stanislavski’s psycho-technique in theatre.
Yet beyond the technical know-how and professional knowledge
often referred to as theory, the instrumental perspective also embraces
theory or theoretical research of an exploratory or applied nature. This
might, for instance, involve research into a specific use of materials in
visual arts, dramaturgic research into a theatrical text, or even the current fad of applying information technology in artistic practice. In all
such cases, theory or theoretical research, just like the body of technical knowledge, is used in the service of artistic practice. Theory, as it were,
furnishes the tools and material knowledge that
This instrumental perspective is
are applied to the artistic process or product.
notably found in higher music
The primacy of this instrumental undereducation (at conservatoires).
In visual arts schools, the interstanding of theory in higher professional art
pretive perspective is more
schools today also colours the discussions there on
prominent. For a reflection on
the relation between theory and practice. As a
the Deleuzianisation of the art
school, see Boomgaard 2012. For
consequence, it influences beliefs about the relathe issue of research in higher
tionship between art and science, as well as the
music education, see Borgdorff
and Schuijer 2010.
ways that people perceive ‘research in the arts’. In
my view, the instrumental perspective reinforces
the notion that artistic research should consist primarily of applied research, and that any results of theory development
should serve artistic practices and products. Often this view is pervaded
by what I would call the technical-scientistic paradigm – a frame of
thought in which the laboratory, the conventions of the exact sciences,
and the empirical cycle of discovery and justification form the benchmark for experimentation in the arts. I will return to this later.
To a considerable extent, the opacity and indeterminacy of the
discourse on theory and practice in the arts, as well as on artistic research, derives from not knowing whether particular standpoints are
drawing on the instrumental perspective and on the technical-scientistic
model, or not.

18

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina 19

b) The interpretive perspective holds that theory provides reflection,
knowledge, and understanding with respect to artistic practices and
products. Historically, this view is associated with academic disciplines
like theatre studies and musicology, which try to facilitate understanding of artistic practice from a certain ‘retrospective’ theoretical distance.1 In this sense, ‘theory’ basically involves any form of reflection on
artworks, or on the production or the reception of art, that rises above
the level of the craft itself. Such reflection has gained wide currency in
the ‘grand theories of the humanities’ like hermeneutics, structuralism,
semiotics, deconstruction, pragmatism, and critical theory.
In contexts such as fine arts academies or artists’ workspaces, the
central focus is on research in the arts, rather than on the arts. Such practice-based research does not stand in isolation, however, from theoretical reflections as referred to here. An understanding of artistic processes
and products from a philosophical, ethical, historical, hermeneutic, reconstructive, deconstructive, or generally contextualising point of view
is (or should be) part of any artistic research. That is why so many people are now arguing the importance of cultural studies.
In educational practice at schools for the arts, the amount of emphasis put on ‘theory’ in the interpretive sense seems inversely proportional to the amount of time spent on ‘theory’ in the sense of professional
training. Music theory as professional and instrumental expertise, for instance, dominates musical training at the Dutch conservatoires, which
have never developed any tradition of theoretical reflection that extends
beyond the level of the craft. In developing and planning practice-based
masters and PhD programmes in the arts (which I will return to below),
one needs to devote far more attention to theory from the interpretive
perspective, not least with a view to future academic accreditation.
1. The model and inspiration for this perspective and attitude is the Greek theoros, from
which our word theory derives. A theoros was an official envoy sent by Greek cities to observe and report back on public festivities and ceremonies. His participation in social and
religious gatherings consisted of distancing himself from what was going on, absorbing it
and mentally registering it, so that he could later report on it in a particular way. Theoria
– which involves consideration and contemplation, a scientific, philosophical or more
generally intellectual task – is equally a part of art theory as technè, the received or acquired talent to practise the artistic profession on the basis of technical know-how and
professional knowledge.

19

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina 20

A distinction is introduced here
between world revelation and
world constitution. This will
return regularly in subsequent
chapters. It often seems as if we
have to choose between hermeneutics (or scientific realism)
and constructivism. Towards the
end of the book, however, and
explicitly in chapters 9 and 11,
I will make it clear that this does
not involve an opposition, but
an ‘articulation’ that is at once
real and artificial. Whenever this
is explicitly or more indirectly at
issue, I will provide an annotation (‘constructivist realism’) to
point it out.

c) Whereas the interpretive approach addresses, in
a sense, the ‘world-revealing’ nature of art theory
and research, the performative perspective focuses
on their ‘world-constituting’ quality. I am suggesting here the metatheoretical insight that theory is not ‘innocent’, and that the instrumental
perspective, as well as the theoretical distance
with respect to art that I subsequently discussed,
both foster an understanding of art which itself
constitutes a fertile ground and starting point
for new art practices and products.
By highlighting this metatheoretical perspective, I wish to emphasise more specifically
that theory itself is a practice, and that theoretical
approaches always partially shape the practices they focus on. Whether
we are dealing with the theory of linear perspective, classical rhetoric,
the twelve-tone technique, set theory in serial music, or insights into
the cultural meanings and societal functions of art, the performative
power of theory not only alters the way we look
Constructivist realism
at art and the world, but it also makes these into
what they are.
That art practitioners can be sceptical about theory – even to the
point of developing a misplaced aversion to it – is perhaps not just because some theories seem far afield from the actual practice of art, but
also because the performative power of theory competes with the performative power of art. On the other hand, thinkers about art who take
unnecessarily reticent or aloof attitudes towards artistic practice (especially that of the present day), and who develop their own codes to institutionally protect their ‘profession’ from artistic practice, may be exhibiting a similar perception. Both sides show a limited understanding
of the interaction and reciprocal influence of theory and practice. Not
only do thinkers and doers need each other, but in a certain sense
thinkers are also doers, and vice versa.
d) The immanent perspective hence reminds us that there is also no such
thing as ‘innocent’ practice. Practices are ‘sedimented spirit’ (Adorno).

20

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina 21

Action theory, phenomenology, and philosophy of science have taught
us that every practice, every human action, is infused with theory. Naive
practice does not exist in this respect. All practices embody concepts,
theories, and understandings. Artistic practices do so in a literal sense,
too – no practices and no materials exist in the arts which are not saturated with experiences, histories, or beliefs. There is no unsigned material, and that is one reason why art is always reflexive. There is no ‘natural law’ of art; its nature is second nature, preshaped by history,
culture, and theory. This gives the lie to that modernist view in the arts
which once championed the purification of the medium.
An additional consideration that applies in the arts is that the
knowledge and experience embodied in their media will always, to some
degree, manage to evade the identifying and levelling gaze of rationality, thereby escaping discursive translation. Philosophical aesthetics
has always acknowledged this, from Baumgarten
‘Partly …’
to Adorno and Derrida. Nevertheless, the unique In the debate on research in the
nature of knowledge in art must not tempt us to arts, there is disagreement about
oppose art practice to art theory. Doing is also whether, or to what extent, the
artistic outcomes of the research
thinking, albeit an exceptional form of thinking. (the concrete artworks and art
Common to artistic practice and theoret- practices generated by the reical reflection is that both relate to the existing search) are to be discursively
framed – that is, accompanied
world. But art knowledge is always also embod- by a contextualisation, a theoied in form and matter. Creative processes, artis- retical frame, an interpretation,
tic practices, and artworks all incorporate knowl- or a reconstruction or documentation of the research process.
edge which simultaneously shapes and expands This is one of the issues of dethe horizons of the existing world – not discur- marcation in the foundational
sively, but in auditory, visual, and tactile ways, debate. My position is that this
discursive framing is necessary.
aesthetically, expressively, and emotively. This ‘art The key arguments for this will
knowledge’ is the subject, as well as partly an be given in chapters 2, 7, and
10. To forego such framing imoutcome, of artistic research as defined here.

Research in the arts
The frequent plea for convergence between artistic and academic research is a stark reflection of
the equally lamented schism between those two
spheres of activity. But in spite of the many recog-

21

The Conflict of the Faculties

plies a departure from academia.
That said, the discursive forms
in which the framing may take
place are highly varied. They do
not confine themselves to conventional academic discourse.
The qualification ‘partly’ will
be encountered regularly in subsequent chapters.

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina 22

nised areas of contiguity and overlap, some observers continue to insist on the (both theoretically and institutionally) sui generis nature of
research in the arts in comparison to that in [traditional] universities.
This is justified as follows: Even though the institutional division between university and art education is an unnatural one, and does not
do justice to a field of practice in which thinking and doing are interwoven, the link between artistic research and artistic practice at schools
of the arts is a very direct one. Artistic practice is already ‘in house’, as
it were – embodied by the artists that teach there and in the practical
training on offer. Art education thus already maintains intimate links
to the world of art practice – to orchestras, ensembles, and theatre companies, to production companies and artists’ workspaces, to galleries
and studios. An additional argument is that the largely historical focus of the traditional academic humanities severely curtails any attention to the contemporary arts – and hence also to the creative process
in the arts – whereas those very themes are central to both the training and the research in art schools. It is rightly pointed out that research
and theory development in art academies and workspaces, by its close
proximity to current artistic practice, makes a vital contribution to the
discourse on art. It can also positively influence the nature and level of
the public debate on the arts.
The sui generis nature of artistic research also fuels the international debate2 on whether to conform to the conventions of academic research, such as standards of methodology, verifiability, replicability, and
reporting. Opinions on such issues are underlain
The reports published by the
to a significant extent by beliefs and misunder- UK Council for Graduate Edustandings about the supposed uniqueness of artis- cation and Arts and Humanities
tic research methods. I would argue as follows: Research Council not only influenced the creation of chapEven if one accepts that the knowledge embodied ters 1 and 2 of this book, but
in art is of a different order than the more ‘con- they also aided the establishventional’ forms of academic or scientific knowl- ment of the docartes doctorate
programme.
edge, that does not mean the methods for access2. See e.g. Davies 2002; Dallow 2005; Bauer 2001. For the debate in the UK, see also

ukcge 1997; ukcge 2001; des 2002; Nelson and Andrews 2003; ahrb 2003; and
ahrc 2007.

22

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina 23

This is a central theme in this
book: Does artistic research
have a methodological framework of its own? My position is
yes and no. Yes, because one
specific characteristic of artistic
research is that artworks and art
practices form an integral part
of the research process – the research takes place in and
through art practice. No, because a researcher can additionally make use of a variety of
methods, techniques, and perspectives, whether drawn from
the humanities, the social sciences or the natural sciences
(methodological pluralism).

ing, retrieving, and disseminating such knowledge
are also different. Both those who would welcome
a convergence of artistic and academic research,
and those who would oppose such a development,
frequently show a limited (if not short-sighted)
awareness of the broad diversity of methods and
techniques in systematic research.
The limited scientific notion commonly
held on both sides is that of the empirical-deductive approach. To make matters worse, both
sides depict it in the form of an obsolete empiricist caricature. One of them would like any experimentation in the arts to be comparable to laboratory trials, while the other argues against
submitting to the presumed constrictive frameworks of this scientific
model. It is not really surprising that both sides have failed to take heed
of recent trends in the theory of science, which have led to a ‘liberalisation’ and diversification of research approaches and to a critique of
the ‘fact-value dichotomy’ (Putnam 2002). Most of the disputants
come from the world of the art schools and are not yet sufficiently informed in this area.
In raising the issue of the specific place and quality of artistic research, we should not seek confrontations with experimental research
in the empirical-deductive exact sciences, nor with socially engaged empirical-descriptive research in the social sciences, and also not with the
cultural-analytical, aesthetic, or critical-hermeneutic interpretive approaches in the humanities. However, to adopt one-sidedly the ‘natural
science’ model, the ‘social science’ model, or the ‘humanities’ model
[…] will produce a myopic understanding of what is really going on
in the arts. The many divergent approaches to artistic products and
processes each have their own raison d’être – and that is also reflected
in the widely varied research mandates of various professors who have
begun doing research in art schools in recent years.
Not only experimentation in practice, but also reflection on
practice and interpretation of practice, may be part of research in the
arts as defined here. The sui generis place and nature of artistic research

23

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:08 Pagina 24

Here I touch upon three elements that are characteristic of
artistic research: the type of
knowledge at hand within this
research, the method through
which that knowledge is articulated, and the way in which it is
disseminated. In chapter 2, and
later in chapter 7, these three
elements will be supplemented
by four additional elements:
the specific intent of the endeavour, the artistic research
question, its originality, and the
dual artistic and academic context of the research.

is legitimised in part by the four perspectives on
theory and practice in the arts discussed above, as
well as by the institutional intertwinement of
theory and practice in art schools. This special position is legitimised more specifically by the exceptional nature of ‘knowledge in art’, as well as
by the exceptional ways in which research findings are articulated and communicated.
When the familiar frameworks of work
analysis, production analysis, and reception analysis are transposed from research on the arts into
research in and through the arts, that reduces the
distance to the object of research to such a degree that the work of art,
the creative process, and the signifying context themselves all become
constituent parts of the research. In the medium itself – in the creative
process, the artwork, and its effects – perspectives are revealed and constituted, horizons are shifted, and new distinctions are articulated.
The specific nature of artistic research can be
‘… both cognitively and artistipinpointed in the way that it both cognitively and cally …’ See annotation on
artistically articulates this revealment and consti- page 17.
tution of the world, an articulation which is normative, affective, and expressive all at once – and
Constructivist realism
which also, as it were, sets our moral, psychological, and social life into motion.
This demarcation of research in the arts – extending from abstract knowledge to instrumental know-how – now brings me to three
recommendations for conducting such research. I hope they will provide a stimulus to further discussion.
1. Artistic processes or products are essential components of and in
artistic research. The choice of research methods is free and will vary with
the research questions. The methodological diversity referred to above,
however, is always complementary to the use made of the medium itself.
2. Research results consist partly of one or more artistic productions or
presentations. The results communicate the artistic outcomes both cognitively and artistically. Far from being a mere illustration accompa-

24

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 25

nying the research, the artistic outcomes thus
form an indispensable component of it.
3. Critical reflection on the research process,
and documentation of it in discursive form, is
also part of the research results. The researcher
is obligated to the research community to situate each study in a broader research context and
to elucidate both the process and the outcome in
accordance with customary standards.

‘The researcher is obligated …’
At the expert meeting ‘Art as
Research’ in Amsterdam, a heated debate erupted between proponents and opponents of such
recommendations. Some people
vehemently objected that such
imperatives were being imposed
on artistic practice by external
forces (by ‘Bologna’; cf. chapter
5, page 116).

The conflict of the faculties3
In 1798, Immanuel Kant published his pamphlet entitled Der Streit der
Fakultäten (The Conflict of the Faculties), in which he urged an end
to the subordination of the ‘lower faculties’ in the universities to the
‘higher faculties’. The lower faculties of Kant’s day and age, which studied the natural sciences, humanities, and philosophy, were entitled to
award only masters degrees, whereas the higher faculties, which dealt
with theology, law, and medicine, could offer doctorates. The higher
faculties were accountable to the church or the state, just as today the
practice of religion, law, and medicine still falls under the jurisdiction
of clerical or secular authorities, which protect the professions and regulate professional practice.
When the late eighteenth-century authorities tried to interfere
with the content of Kant’s philosophical treatise Religion innerhalb der
Grenzen der bloßen Vernunft (Religion within the Boundaries of Mere
Reason), published in 1794, he resisted such interference, arguing vigorously for freedom of research in the lower faculties, which were oriented primarily to pure scientific research rather than to professional
qualification. Kant’s appeal helped to foster the intellectual climate that
made possible the founding of the Friedrich Wilhelm (later Humboldt)
University in Berlin in 1809. Besides lending institutional legitimacy to
freedom of research, the university also granted the lower faculties the
right to educate students for the doctorate.
The time has now arrived to make a similar appeal for the liber3. I am indebted here to Ken Friedman (2002).

25

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 26

ation of what we might provokingly call the ‘lowest faculty’ – that of art
education and research. Just as the implicit hierarchy between fundamental and applied research was abandoned some time ago in the Dutch
academic world – as reflected in the renaming of the Netherlands Organisation for Pure Scientific Research (zwo) to Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (nwo) – it is now time to grant equal opportunities to artistic research as conducted in art education institutions.
As a corollary, the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences
(knaw) should receive back its old name, the Royal Institute of Sciences,
Literature and Fine Arts, by which we would acknowledge that science
and art make equally vital, if dissimilar, contributions to culture.
In concrete terms this would mean, first of all, opening the existing direct and indirect academic funding mechanisms to support research in the arts as defined here. In other words, structural funding for
research in higher professional art schools needs to be broadened, and
augmented to a level similar to that available to other institutions of
higher education. In addition, professional art schools must be eligible
to compete for grants and other funding, to create research traineeships,
and to allocate staff to assessment committees. The ‘lowest faculty’
should further be enabled to set up properly funded ‘practice-based’
masters and PhD programmes in the arts.
The faculties of the human mind are not
Eighteenth-century faculties
subject
to a value hierarchy. The institutional
psychology spoke of the differfaculties, in which those human faculties are chalent ‘faculties’ of the human
mind. Present-day cognitive
lenged and utilised, therefore have the right to
science has brought these faculequal treatment.
ties back onto an equal footing.

26

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 27

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 28

Chapter 2

The Debate
on Research
in the Arts

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 29

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 30

Context
This text is based on a presentation I made in September
2005 to the think-tank empar (Enquiry into Musical
Practice as Research) in Ghent. empar was comprised
of representatives from the Orpheus Institute, the
Conservatorium van Amsterdam, the Royal Conservatoire
in The Hague, Leiden University, the Katholieke
Universiteit Leuven, the University of Oxford, Royal
Holloway, London, and the Royal College of Music,
London. I adapted and redelivered the presentation on
several later occasions, including the elia conference
entitled ‘re:search in and through the Arts’, held at
Berlin in October 2005. The text has been published in
several places and in several languages.

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 31

If the urgency of an issue can be measured by the ferocity of the debates
surrounding it, then the issue of ‘research in the arts’ is an urgent one.
Under labels such as ‘art practice as research’ or ‘research in and through
the arts’, a discussion topic has arisen in recent years that has elements
both of philosophy (notably epistemology and methodology) and of educational politics and strategies. That makes it a hybrid issue, and that
does not always promote the clarity of the debate.
The crux of the matter is whether a phenomenon like research
in the arts exists – an endeavour in which the production of art is itself a fundamental part of the research process,
The distinction between the onand whereby art is partly the result of research. tology, epistemology, and
More particularly, the issue is whether this type of methodology of artistic research
research distinguishes itself from other research in is a relative one. As I will point
out in chapter 3, page 69, and
terms of the nature of its research object (an on- chapter 8, pages 180-81, the distological question), in terms of the knowledge it tinction serves a merely heuristic
holds (an epistemological question), and in terms purpose. In practice, the defining of the research object, the
of the working methods that are appropriate to it knowledge involved in it, and
(a methodological question). A parallel question the ways we gain access to it are
is whether this type of research qualifies as aca- intertwined. These perspectives
converge in Hans-Jörg Rheindemic research in its own right, and whether it berger’s epistemic thing as an inappropriately belongs at the doctoral level of strument of research (chapter 9).
higher education.
The present urgency of the issue is partly
due to government policies affecting this field. As a result of higher
education reforms in many European countries, research has now become part of the primary function in higher proThe place of research in the arts
fessional schools as well as in universities. Rewithin the wider realm of acasearch in higher professional education differs
demic research is also the subject of chapter 4. I shall argue
from that in university education in the degree to
there that artistic research merits
which
it is oriented to application, design, and dea place in the research hierarchy
and that it ought to be included
velopment. As a rule, ‘pure’ or fundamental scholas a field of its own in science
arly or scientific research (if indeed that exists) is
and technology classifications.
and remains the province of the [traditional] universities. Research at theThis is especially true in counatre and dance schools, conservatories, art acad- tries where the binary system is
emies, and other professional schools of the arts still firmly in place, such as the
Netherlands.

31

The Debate on Research in the Arts

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 32

is therefore of a different nature to what generally takes place in the academic world of universities and research institutes. What that difference exactly entails is the subject of controversies – and not only the
opinions, but also the motives are highly divergent here.
The first thing worth noting about the debate is that many of
the contending parties tend to opt for the rhetorical force of ‘knowing you are right’ above the gentle power of convincing arguments.
It is not entirely coincidental that people’s personal opinions usually
correlate with their own affiliations. Many contenders on one side are
inclined to entrench themselves in established institutional positions, portraying themselves as defenders of quality standards on
which they seem to have a patent. Some on the other side put up resistance against any form of ‘academisation’ (as it is sometimes scornfully called) – afraid of losing their own distinc‘Academia’ is the term I will be
tiveness, wary of the perceived ‘stuffy’ confines
using from chapter 3 onwards to
of academia. The term ‘academisation’ refers
denote the entire realm of higher education and research, inhere both to the dispirited reality of university
cluding the field of artistic rebureaucracy and to an objectionable ‘academic
search. Far too often, the expresdrift’, whereby some of the vital spirit of artistic
sions ‘scientific research’ and
‘academic research’ imply an unpractice at the art academies has to be betrayed
necessary opposition between
in order to ‘cash in’ on the greater social status
them and artistic research.
and respectability that our culture still ascribes
to intellectual work.1
The shift in government policies is not the only factor that has
put the issue of ‘research in the arts’ onto the agenda of public and academic debate; developments in art practice itself have also played a
role. For some years now, it has been a commonplace to talk about contemporary art in terms of reflection and research. Although reflection
and research were closely tied to the tradition of modernism from the
start, they are also intertwined with art practice in our late modern or
postmodern era – not only in terms of the self-perception of creators
and performers, but increasingly in institutional contexts too, from
1. In Flanders, the ‘academisation of higher professional arts education’ is now being
promoted under that very label. Collaborative arrangements between universities and
professional arts schools are developing joint research programmes in the arts.

32

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 33

funding regulations to the content of programmes at art academies and
laboratories. Particularly in the last decade (following a period when
‘cultural diversity’ and ‘new media’ were the watchwords), research and
reflection have been part of the verbal attire sported by both art practice and art criticism in public and professional
These distinguished Dutch
fora on the arts.2 And so it could come to pass postgraduate institutes currently
that ‘research and development’ are no longer an face trying times. Drastic cutissue just for universities, businesses, and inde- backs have made their very survival uncertain. Such institutes
pendent research centres and consultancy agen- also have apparent difficulties in
cies, but that artists and art institutions are also determining a stance towards
now increasingly calling their activities ‘research’. artistic research. Some are identifying themselves as research inIt is no coincidence that the art exhibition Doc- stitutes but at the same time are
umenta in Kassel presents itself as an ‘academy’, pulling back from higher educaand that post-academic institutes like the Jan van tion. One wonders, though,
what could be understood by
Eyck Academie and the Rijksacademie van Beel- research outside ‘academia’.
dende Kunsten in the Netherlands are labelling
their activities as ‘research’ and their participants
as ‘researchers’.3
One of the issues figuring prominently in the debate about research in the arts is: When does art practice count as research? (and its
possible corollary: Doesn’t all art practice count as
These demarcations play an inresearch to some extent?). Can criteria perhaps be tegral part in this book. They
formulated that can help to differentiate art prac- concern, on the one hand, the
tice-in-itself from art practice-as-research? And a relationship of artistic research
to the art world and, on the
concomitant question is: How does artistic re- other hand, the relationship of
search differ from what is called academic or sci- artistic research to academia.
entific research? In the discussion to follow, I will
try to introduce some clarity into the issue of research in the arts. I start by tracing the debate so far and citing the relevant sources. I then explore several terminological matters and the concept of ‘research’. My analysis of the central question – the intrinsic
2. Another theme that has drifted ashore in the past decade is a rediscovered ‘artistic
engagement’.
3. The importance attached to R&D has been diminishing lately in the business world. Is
the art world soon to follow?

33

The Debate on Research in the Arts

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 34

nature of research in the arts, especially in comparison to the currently
more mainstream academic research – is based on the three perspectives
referred to above: the ontology, the epistemology, and the methodology of research in the arts. I have already argued elsewhere in the Dutch
context [reproduced in chapter 1 above] for direct and indirect public
funding of research in the arts. In the present chapter, I will conclude
my discussion by commenting on the aspects of this issue that pertain
to educational politics and strategies – focusing primarily on the legitimacy of this type of research and on the implications that has for
possible PhD programmes in professional art schools.

The debate
The granting of masters or doctorate degrees to artists (composers, architects, designers) on the basis of their art work is nothing new. It has
been possible for decades in the United States, where a degree of this
kind is often a prerequisite for appointments at professional arts institutions.4 It is common knowledge that these institutional constraints
are not always beneficial to either the level of artistic practice on campus or the scholarly level of the staff. In the Netherlands it is possible
to obtain a PhD at a university on the basis of a ‘doctoral design’ (proefontwerp), but artists have made little use of this option up to now. A
new development, at least in terms of the European context, is that the
current institutional integration of research into
In Sweden, a new ‘artistic docprofessional art schools has made the distinctive
torate’ was introduced in 2010.
nature of this ‘practice-based research’ into an
Artists can now complete a
third-cycle course at the nationitem of debate.
al research school Konstnärliga
This debate on art practice-as-research,
Forskarskolan. In Norway, a naand on the degree programmes in which that
tional Artistic Research Fellowship Programme has been in optype of investigations can be carried out, has reeration since 2003. In Finland, a
ceived a significant impetus from the university
new doctorate programme will
be launched in 2012, supported
reforms made during the 1990s in the United
by the three Helsinki art schools
Kingdom and in Scandinavia. The academic and
that are set to merge in 2013.
policy debates about research in the arts have
4. For criteria applying to practice-based masters and doctorate degrees in the usa, see,
e.g. for the field of music, nasm 2010.

34

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 35

therefore mainly taken place in those countries. In the UK, the reforms
involved assigning the polytechnics (higher professional schools) officially equal status to the universities, thus enabling art schools to secure
direct and indirect public funding for research (Candlin 2001). Comparable reforms occurred in Australia (cf. deetya 1998). In Scandinavia,
some research programmes in professional arts schools now receive
structural funding. Not all governments are ripe for these types of reforms just yet, and in some cases they are still tenaciously clinging to
a rigid divide between academic education with research and professional training without research.
A second impetus, mainly relevant to the European continent, is
the so-called Bologna Process – the ambition of the various member
states of the European Community to forge a single framework for higher
education, in three ‘cycles’ made up of bachelors, masters, and doctorate degree courses. The requirements in terms of
This account has meanwhile
learning outcomes that the three cycles will have been overtaken by reality. Artisto satisfy are currently being formulated, includ- tic research is now on the agenda
ing the ones for arts education. One issue to be ad- in all art disciplines. In music,
the Orpheus Institute in Ghent
dressed in this process is the status and nature of is now home to a prominent rethe research in the creative and performing arts. search unit called orcim (OrThe first thing that is noticeable about the pheus Research Centre in Music). The umbrella organisations
exchange of views about practice-oriented re- elia (European League of Instisearch in the arts is that the discussion mainly tutes of the Arts) and aec (Eurotakes place within the fields of visual arts and de- pean Association of Conservatoires) offer platforms for artistic
sign. It is less of an issue in the fields of theatre research. The academic network
and dance education, architecture, and film and share (Step-Change in Higher
new media; and in music there was virtually no Arts Research and Education)
was launched in 2010 under elia
debate at all about practice-based research until coordination, and eparm (Eurorecently.5 The reason for that is pure speculation, pean Platform for Artistic Rebut the fact remains that in the past 15 years both search in Music) was initiated in
the aec in 2011.
the theoretical and philosophical dimensions of
5. Some discussion does seem to be stirring in the field of music in recent years. In 2004,
a European network was set up consisting of music institutes with doctoral arts studies
(midas), and the aec (European Association of Conservatoires) has also recently
launched a working group to consider the doctoral (third) cycle.

35

The Debate on Research in the Arts

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 36

arts research and its more policy-related aspects have been the most
widely debated in the world of visual arts and design.
The discussion – which, as noted, has been dominated by the situations in the UK and Scandinavia – has led to various forms of activity.
An important source of information is the papers and reports produced
by organisations involved in research funding and/or assessment, such
as the UK Council of Graduate Education (ukcge 1997, 2001), the Arts
and Humanities Research Council (ahrb 2003; ahrc 2007), and the
Research Assessment Exercise (rae 2005), all in the UK. A number of
conferences on arts research have also been conFor a more recent overview of
vened, and their proceedings form a corpus of
conferences, policy documents,
texts that have fed the debate. More and more
and literature, see chapter 5.
The founding of the Journal for
journals are now publishing articles that deal
Artistic Research was an imporwith ‘practice as research’, and several collections
tant juncture in the advancement of the field; see chapter 11
of articles, monographs, and even manuals on refor an analysis of how it came
search in the arts, and its methodology in particinto being.
ular, have appeared (among them Gray and Malins 2004; Sullivan 2005; Hannula, Suoranta, and
Vadén 2005; Macleod and Holdridge 2006).
Two electronic mailing lists, PhD-Design and parip, are also
worth mentioning. PhD-Design is entirely devoted to discussions and
information on developing practice-based docKen Friedman, an active memtoral degree courses in the field of design. parip
ber of PhD-Design, corrected
(Practice as Research in Performance) is a project
my description in e-mail correspondence in October 2010:
sponsored by ahrc at the University of Bristol
‘The PhD-Design list is dedicatthat focuses mainly on topics involving practiceed to discussion of PhD studies
and related research in design.’
as-research, mostly in theatre and dance. In OcThis also includes practicetober 2002, a lively discussion took place on the
based research.
parip list on a range of issues (institutional and
organisational as well as more theoretical and
philosophical) in relation to such research (see Thomson 2003 for a
compilation of that discussion.)6
The debate about research in the creative and performing arts has
reached the rest of Europe in recent years. Not everyone, though,
seems to realise that the issue we are just starting to confront has already
been carefully considered in other countries. This is not to say that the

36

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 37

correct answers by definition come from abroad. The art is always to
learn from the insights and experiences that others have already gained.

On terminology and research definitions
Terminology
The essay that Christopher Frayling published in 1993 entitled Research
in Art and Design introduced a distinction between types of arts research
which has been referred to by many ever since.
Although Frayling still serves as
Frayling differentiated between ‘research into art’, a point of reference for many,
‘research for art’, and ‘research through art’.7 I, the ‘twist’ I gave was, and still is,
too, will employ this trichotomy, albeit with a not without reason. Frayling’s
‘research through art and design’
slightly different twist. I will distinguish between corresponds to my ‘research for
(a) research on the arts, (b) research for the arts, art’. It involves material research,
experimental development,
and (c) research in the arts.
and practical action research.
a) Research on the arts is research that has Frayling describes ‘research for
art practice in the broadest sense of the word as art and design’ as follows: ‘reits object. It refers to investigations aimed at search where the end product is
an artefact – where the thinking
drawing valid conclusions about art practice from is, so to speak, embodied in the
a theoretical distance. Ideally speaking, theoreti- artefact, where the goal is not
cal distance implies a fundamental separation, primarily communicable
knowledge in the sense of verbal
and a certain distance, between the researcher communication, but in the
and the research object. Although that is an ide- sense of visual or iconic or
alisation, the regulative idea applying here is that imagistic communication’. It
thereby pertains to forms of
the object of research remains untouched under thinking that are embodied in
the inquiring gaze of the researcher. Research of art and design. I believe this
this type is common in the meanwhile estab- justifies my use of the term
research in the arts.
lished academic humanities disciplines, including
6. There are also other projects, networks, and institutions focusing on this area. I will just
mention two more groups in England that figure in the debate: the Performing Arts Learning and Teaching Innovation Network (palatine n.d.), based at Lancaster University (see
e.g. Nelson and Andrews 2003); and the Research Training Initiative (rti n.d.), based at
Birmingham Institute of Art and Design. The parip (n.d.), palatine, and rti websites
contain broad-ranging bibliographies. Websites for all the projects, networks, and mailing
lists mentioned in this paper can readily be found via any search engine.
7. Frayling 1993; Frayling’s distinction referred in its turn to one made by Herbert Read
in 1944 between ‘teaching through art’ and ‘teaching to art’.

37

The Debate on Research in the Arts

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 38

musicology, art history, theatre studies, media studies, and literature.8
Social science research on the arts likewise belongs to this category.
Looking beyond all the differences between these disciplines (and
within the disciplines themselves), the common characteristics of these
approaches are ‘reflection’ and ‘interpretation’ – whether the research
is more historical and hermeneutic, philosophical and aesthetic, critical and analytic, reconstructive or deconstructive, descriptive or explanatory. Donald Schön (1982: 49-69, 275-83) has used the expression
‘reflection on action’ to denote this approach to practice. I have previously described it as the ‘interpretive perspective’ [see chapter 1].
b) Research for the arts can be described as applied research in
a narrow sense. In this type, art is not so much the object of investigation, but its objective. The research provides insights and instruments
that may find their way into concrete practices in some way or other.
Examples are material investigations of particular alloys used in casting metal sculptures, investigation of the application of live electronics in the interaction between dance and lighting design, or the study
of the ‘extended techniques’ of an electronically modifiable cello. In
every case these are studies in the service of art practice. The research
delivers, as it were, the tools and the knowledge of materials that are
needed during the creative process or in the artistic product. I have
called this the ‘instrumental perspective’.
c) Research in the arts is the most controversial of the three ideal
types. Donald Schön speaks in this context of ‘reflection in action’, and
I earlier described this approach as the ‘immanent’ and ‘performative perspective’. It concerns research that does not assume the separation of subject and object, and does not observe a distance between the researcher
and the practice of art. Instead, the artistic practice itself is an essential
component of both the research process and the research results. This approach is based on the understanding that no fundamental separation exists between theory and practice in the arts. After all, there are no art practices that are not saturated with experiences, histories, and beliefs; and
8. In recent years these disciplines are also addressing what we might call the
‘performativity of the theoretical gaze’. An example in theatre studies is a conference held
in Amsterdam entitled ‘The Anatomical Theatre Revisited’ (atr 2006).

38

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 39

conversely there is no theoretical access to, or interpretation of, art
practice that does not partially shape that practice into what it is. Concepts and theories, experiences and understandings are interwoven with
art practices; and, partly for this reason, art is always reflexive. Research
in the arts hence seeks to articulate some of this embodied knowledge
throughout the creative process and in the art object.
Various terms and expressions have been used in the literature to denote artistic research. The most common of these are ‘practice-based research’, ‘practice-led research’, and ‘practice as research’. Practice-based
research is a collective notion that may cover any form of practice-oriented research in the arts. The ahrc currently prefers the term practice-led research to denote research that is practice-focused, and many
are now following that example. The most explicit
On the European continent and
term of all is practice as research, as it expresses in Scandinavia, the expression
the direct intertwinement of research and practice ‘artistic research’, or equivalents
as discussed under (c) above. The expression ‘artis- in translation, is increasingly
prevalent (even though it may
tic research’, which is sometimes chosen to high- sound peculiar to native English
light the distinctiveness of art research, evinces speakers).
not only a comparable intimate bond between
theory and practice, but also embodies the promise of a distinctive path in a methodological sense that differentiates
artistic research from the more mainstream academic research.
It has been argued from various perspectives that the trichotomy
proposed above – research on, for, and in the arts – does not exhaustively
describe the possible forms of artistic research.9 After all, isn’t one distinctive characteristic of the arts, and hence too of the research tied up
with it, their very ability to elude strict classifications and demarcations,
and to actually generate the criteria – in each individual art project and
every time again and again – which the research is to satisfy, both in the
methodological sense and in the ways the research is explained and documented? In this particular quality, it is argued, lies one of the major dis9. My colleague Marijke Hoogenboom, for example, in her remit at the Amsterdam
School of the Arts, attempts to approximate what research could potentially be, starting
from current artistic practice and arts education practice.

39

The Debate on Research in the Arts

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 40

tinctions vis-à-vis what is customary in the academic world – a fundamental openness for the unknown, the unexpected, which can also form
a corrective to what is currently regarded as valid research.
This argument is based on a specific and limited concept of what
scholarship and science are. More particularly, it assumes that mainstream scientific research is always based on an established protocol and
that universal criteria exist for the validity of research. This derives from
a misconception. Not only do academic researchers often develop the
appropriate research methods and techniques as they go, but the rules
for the validity and reliability of the research results also do not derive
from some standard that is external to, and hence independent of, the
research; they are defined within the research domain itself. Science at
its best is less rigid and constrained than some participants in the debate would like to believe.
Obviously this overarching differentiation of three types of art
research does not yet say very much. In the case of ‘research in the arts’,
to which we are confining ourselves here, we still have to answer the
question of when art practice qualifies as research. What do we mean
here by ‘research’, and what criteria can we formulate to distinguish art
practice-in-itself from art practice-as-research?10 Before addressing the
question of what we should understand by research, I would just like
to comment briefly on the classifications used in art practice itself.
In the arts we are accustomed to differentiating in terms of activity or role (music, theatre), dimension (visual art), and various other
aspects. The music world distinguishes, for example, between composing, performing, and improvising;11 the theatre world distinguishes
between actors and directors, playwrights and stage designers; in the visual arts we can differentiate between two-dimensional, three-dimensional, and audiovisual work; and so on. In the debate about art re10. The idea that all art practice is by definition research might sometimes be useful for
underlining the reflexive nature of art, and it may arise in the uncertain quest contained
in the creative process, but it is not fruitful for bringing clarity into the debate about
research in the arts. If everything is research, then nothing is research any more.
11. A fourth category could be called ‘hybrid activities’, inasmuch as, especially in the case
of contemporary music, no clear distinction can be made between composing, performing, and improvising.

40

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 41

search, it has proven fruitful to employ a different distinction – that between object, process, and context. Object then stands for the ‘work of
art’: the composition, the image, the performance, the design, as well
as for the dramatic structure, the scenario, the stage setup, the material, the score. Process stands for the ‘making of art’: creating, producing, rehearsing, developing images and concepts, trying out. Context
stands for the ‘art world’: the public reception, the cultural and historical environment, the industry, et cetera.12 Especially in the assessing (and funding) of research in the arts, it makes quite some difference
whether one exclusively examines the results in the form of concrete art
objects, or whether one also looks at the documentation of the process
that has led to those results or at the context which is partially constitutive of the meaning of both the object and the process.
Research definitions
The Research Assessment Exercise and the Arts
and Humanities Research Council both employ
research definitions (albeit different ones) that enable them to judge research projects in terms of
eligibility criteria. I am intentionally drawing
here again on the UK situation, because the official bodies charged with funding research there
are explicit about their assessment standards. The
definition of the rae (2005: 34) is briefly: ‘original investigation undertaken in order to gain
knowledge and understanding’.13

For the Research Excellence
Framework, which will supersede the rae in 2014, the short
definition is ‘… a process of
investigation leading to new
insights, effectively shared’.
The rest of the definition (‘It
includes work ...’) remains unchanged. rae, Assessment
Framework and Guidance on
Submissions, July 2011.

12. As the visual artist Robert Klatser has pointed out to me, object, process, and context
cannot be, or at least not always, distinguished from one another in the experience of the
artists themselves, in their practice of art creation. Yet such a counterfactual distinction is
an aid to clarification, and it helps to guide and regulate research practices.
13. The full text is ‘“Research” for the purpose of the rae is to be understood as original
investigation undertaken in order to gain knowledge and understanding. It includes work
of direct relevance to the needs of commerce, industry, and to the public and voluntary
sectors; scholarship; the invention and generation of ideas, images, performances, artefacts
including design, where these lead to new or substantially improved insights; and the use
of existing knowledge in experimental development to produce new or substantially
improved materials, devices, products and processes, including design and construction.’

41

The Debate on Research in the Arts

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 42

If we also take this broad definition of research as a benchmark
for research in the arts – and I see no reason not to do so as of yet –
then we can use it to derive the following criteria. (1) The investigation should be intended as research. Inadvertent (fortuitous) contributions to knowledge and understanding cannot be regarded as research results (cf. Dallow 2003). (2) Research involves original
contributions – that is, the work should not previously have been carried out by other people, and it should add new insights or knowledge
to the existing corpus (for a problematisation of this criterion, see Pakes
2003). (3) The aim is to enhance knowledge and understanding.
Works of art contribute as a rule to the artistic universe. That universe
encompasses not only the traditional aesthetic sectors; today it also includes areas in which our social, psychological, and moral life is set in
motion in other ways – other performative, evocative, and non-discursive ways. We can hence speak of research in the arts only when the
practice of art delivers an intended, original contribution to what we
know and understand.14
The Arts and Humanities Research Council (ahrb 2003, ahrc
2007) works with a different set of criteria to assess research proposals.
This stems from the fact that the ahrc, in contrast to the rae, does not
judge the results of research in retrospect and does not assess outcomes,
but looks primarily at what the research is to involve and how the study
is to be designed (hence, assessment in advance). Four criteria are set
as parameters. (1) The research must address clearly articulated research
questions or problems. (2) The importance of these questions and problems for a specified research context must be explained, including the
contribution the project will make and how the study will relate to
other research in the area. (3) One or more research methods are to be
specified that will be applied to address, and possibly answer, the questions and problems. (4) The results of the research study and the re14. The Dublin Descriptors (jqi 2004), which set out educational criteria under the
Bologna Process, define research in a comparable manner: ‘a careful study or investigation based on a systematic understanding and critical awareness of knowledge’. This ostensibly broader definition of research is later, when the requirements for PhD research
are discussed, narrowed down to read ‘original research that extends the frontier of
knowledge’.

42

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 43

search process are to be appropriately documented and disseminated.
It goes without saying that research questions, context, methods, documentation, and dissemination are all subject to change in the course
of the study, but the assessment is based on the proposal for the study
design at its inception.
These seven criteria will be disTaken altogether, the definitions above cussed in greater detail in chapprovide discriminating criteria for assessing ter 7. They are components of
whether activities qualify as research: intent, orig- my assessment framework for
artistic research (chapter 10)
inality, knowledge and understanding, research and they are also at work in the
questions, context, methods, and documentation reviewers’ guidelines for the
and dissemination. We can now employ these Journal for Artistic Research
(chapter 11).
criteria to address the question of how art practice-as-research can be distinguished from art
practice-in-itself. I shall do this in the form of a proposition which I
hope others may see fit to challenge:
Art practice qualifies as research when its purpose is to broaden
our knowledge and understanding through an original investigation. It begins with questions that are pertinent to the research
context and the art world, and employs methods that are appropriate to the study. The process and outcomes of the research
are appropriately documented and disseminated to the research
community and to the wider public.
This ‘definition’ itself is little help as of yet. How do we know in our
research, for example, what methods are ‘appropriate to the study’,
and what ‘appropriately documented’ entails?15 Opinions diverge on
points like these in the debate on art research. The definition does at
least furnish us with a negative criterion that we can use to distinguish
art practice-in-itself (or protect it, if need be) from art practice intended-as-research. The next question is at least as important: In what
respects does this type of research differ from the more mainstream
academic research?
15. Does a visual portfolio suffice for a visual art project, for example, or is a verbal report
or explanation always necessary to explain the study?

43

The Debate on Research in the Arts

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 44

The intrinsic nature of research in the arts
The issue of the intrinsic nature of research in the arts can indeed best
be addressed by also asking how that type of research differs from what
we normally understand by scholarly or scientific research (cf. e.g. Eisner 2003). That does not mean we ought to conform in advance to the
frameworks defined by traditional scholarship or science, but it also does
not mean we should counterpose something to that form of scholarship
that eludes those frameworks by definition. Perhaps it does mean that
we, in dialogue with that type of scholarship, will
‘… A modified notion of what
arrive at a modified notion of what academic reacademic research is.’
search is. And there is nothing new about this: the
This broaches a new theme that
will pervade the chapters to folhistory and theory of science have taught us that
low and that forms part of the
principles once considered absolute standards can
theoretical and political ‘agenbe tempered under the influence of ascendant
da’. The introduction of artistic
research into academia is not a
domains of knowledge, after which they remain as
disinterested operation. It alters
standards for one particular form of academic
(widens, enriches) our conception of academia, of what acascholarship.
demic research is. At the moThere are three ways to ask what makes art
ment when non-discursive (emresearch
distinctive in relation to current acabodied) forms of knowledge,
unconventional research methdemic and scientific research: by posing an onods, and alternative ways of doctological, an epistemological, and a methodologumenting and communicating
ical question. The ontological question is (a):
make their entry into academic
research, changes ensue in the
What is the nature of the object, of the subject
way that academia conceives of
matter, in research in the arts? To what does the
itself. Artistic research does not
research address itself? And in what respect does
stand alone here. Allies can be
found in areas such as cultural
it thereby differ from other scholarly or scientific
studies, visual anthropology,
research? The epistemological question is (b):
performance ethnography, and
What kinds of knowledge and understanding are
the cognitive sciences.
embodied in art practice? And how does that
knowledge relate to more conventional types of
academic knowledge? The methodological question is (c): What research methods and techniques are appropriate to research in the arts?
And in what respect do these differ from the methods and techniques
in the natural sciences, the social sciences, and the humanities?
Obviously one should not expect all these questions to be answered within the confines of this chapter. What I shall do below is to

44

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 45

define the space inside which the answers can be given. These parameters could be an aid in the struggle for legitimacy and autonomy for
the research domain of the arts.
The ontological question
As I have argued above, it is useful to distinguish objects, processes, and
contexts when dealing with art practices. But the practice of art involves
more than that. Artistic practices are at once aesthetic practices, which
mean that matters such as taste, beauty, the sublime, and other aesthetic
categories may be at issue and could form part of the subject matter for
study. In addition, artistic practices are hermeneutic practices, because
they always lend themselves to multiple or ambiguous interpretations
and even invite them (cf. deetya 1998: 46). Artistic practices are performative practices, in the sense that artworks and creative processes do
something to us, set us in motion, alter our understanding and view of
the world, also in a moral sense. Artistic practices are mimetic and expressive when they represent, reflect, articulate, or communicate situations or events in their own way, in their own medium. By virtue of
their very nature, artistic practices are also emotive, because they speak
to our psychological, emotional life. So whenever we have to do with
artistic practices, all these perspectives could be at work. Not every artistic investigation will deal with all these points of view at once, but theoretically any of them could figure in the research.
As noted above, the focus of research in the arts may lie on the
artwork itself or on the creative, productive process, in both of which
cases the signifying context also plays a role. In the debate about artistic research, there is a tendency to emphasise the productive process,
because it can potentially be replicated, or in any case documented. This
spotlight on the process also derives from the requirements that some
funding bodies set for the studies – in assessing proposals, they are often chiefly interested in what the study design will be like, whether the
work will be methodologically sound, whether the research questions
are meaningful in the research context, and how the research process
will be documented and the results disseminated. The artistic outcomes
in the form of concrete works of art are, after all, more difficult to ‘objectively’ assess than the rigour with which the research process is de-

45

The Debate on Research in the Arts

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 46

Notwithstanding this differentiation between types of facts, a
hypostatisation of facts seems to
occur here. Actually there are no
pure scientific, social, historical,
or artistic facts. All facts are also
made, and are not merely given
– they are facta, not data – and
the making also involves the
non-factual. As I shall argue in
chapter 7, the artistic universe is
historically and systematically
contingent. It is dependent on
where, how, and by whom or
what it is constituted.

signed and documented. The risk is that works of
art will totally disappear from sight, as if research
in the arts has nothing to do with the art itself.16
In respect of ontology, different types of academic research are concerned with different
kinds of facts. Scientific facts differ from social
facts, and both differ from historical facts. Artistic facts have their own intrinsic status which
cannot be conflated with scientific, social, or historical facts, and which has been described in a
range of different ways in philosophical aesthetics. One element of that status is its immateriality. More precisely, what is characteristic for artistic products, processes,
and experiences is that, in and through the materiality of the medium,
something is presented which transcends materiality. This insight,
which recalls Hegel’s sensory manifestation of the idea (sinnliches
Scheinen der Idee), is also valid, paradoxically enough, even there where
art professes to be purely material and resists any transcendence, as witnessed by the evolution of movements like the historical avant-garde
or like minimalist or fundamental art. Research in the arts devotes attention to both: to the materiality of art to the extent that it makes the
immaterial possible; and to the immateriality of the art to the extent
that it is embedded in the artistic material.
Beyond the object and process of art research, the importance of
context should also be underlined. Artistic practices do not stand on their
own; they are always situated and embedded. No disinterested understanding of art practice is possible, or even a naive gaze. And conversely,
no art practices exist that are not saturated with experiences, histories,
and beliefs. Research in the arts will remain naive unless it acknowledges
and confronts this embeddedness and situatedness in history, in culture
(society, economy, everyday life), as well as in the discourse on art.
To summarise, art research focuses on art objects and creative
processes. This can involve aesthetic, hermeneutic, performative, ex16. Cf. Biggs 2003, and especially Pakes 2004, the latter of whom, citing Gadamer, urges
a return to the work of art as an object of research.

46

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 47

The claim that artistic research
may involve non-conceptual
content will be argued more
fully in chapter 7, and particularly in its final section. The
word ‘conceptual’ in this philosophical context is not to be
confused with the use of that
term in art history. See also note
4 in chapter 7.

pressive, and emotive points of view. If the focus
of investigation is on the creative process, one
should not lose sight of the result of that process
– the work of art itself. Both the material content
and the immaterial, non-conceptual, and nondiscursive contents of creative processes and artistic products may be articulated and communicated in the research study. In all cases, art
research should examine the embeddedness and situatedness of its object of investigation.

The epistemological question
With what kind of knowledge and understanding does research in the
arts concern itself? And how does that knowledge relate to more conventional forms of scholarly knowledge? The short answer to the first
question is: knowledge embodied in art practices (objects, processes).
The answer to the second question will provide a closer understanding
of what ‘embodied knowledge’ may be.
A first avenue of approach derives from a tradition, extending back
to Greek antiquity, which distinguishes theoretical knowledge from
practical knowledge. As early as Aristotle, the concept of episteme, intellectual knowledge, was contrasted with techne, practical knowledge required for making (poiesis) and doing (praxis). The concept of phronesis,
or practical wisdom, in particular the knowledge of how to conduct oneself (particularly in a moral sense), can also be understood in opposition
to intellectual knowledge, which was known to be deficient when it came
to worldly wisdom (Carr 1999; Kessels and Korthagen 2001). In the twentieth century, this opposition was thematised in analytic philosophy as
that between ‘knowing that’ and ‘knowing how’, between knowledge and
skill. Notably Gilbert Ryle (1949), and after him Michael Polanyi (1958,
1967) and the art theoretician David Carr (1978, 1999), elevated practical knowledge – which, being tacit, implicit knowledge, finds no direct
discursive or conceptual expression – to an epistemologically equal footing, and Polanyi even saw it as the foundation of all knowledge.
Since Alexander Baumgarten, the knowledge embodied in art has
been a subject of speculation and reflection in philosophical aesthetics

47

The Debate on Research in the Arts

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 48

I will briefly touch on the kinship between artistic research
and aesthetics in the ‘Aesthetics’
subsection of chapter 7, pages
151-54. Their relationship deserves to be investigated further.

as well. The non-conceptual knowledge embodied in art has been analysed in many different
ways: in Baumgarten as ‘analogon rationis’,
through which great art is able to manifest perfect
sensory knowledge; in Immanuel Kant as ‘cultural
value’ (Kulturwert), the quality through which art gives food for
thought and distinguishes itself from mere aesthetic gratification of the
senses; in Friedrich W.J. Schelling as the ‘organon of philosophy’, the
art experience that rises above every conceptual framework and is the
only experience that can touch on the ‘absolute’; in Theodor W.
Adorno as the ‘epistemic character’ (Erkenntnischarakter), through
which art ‘articulates’ the hidden truth about the dark reality of society; and also in postmodern contemporaries like Jacques Derrida,
Jean-François Lyotard, and Gilles Deleuze, who, each in their own way,
counterpose the evocative power of that which is embodied in art to the
restricting nature of intellectual knowledge.
Some contributors to the debate on the specificity of research in
the arts entertain the belief that art comes into being purely on the basis of intuition, on irrational grounds, and via non-cognitive routes, and
that this makes it inaccessible for investigation from within. This misconception arises when the non-conceptual content of artistic facts becomes confused with their presumed non-cogniThis is a crucial passage. It intive form, and when the non-discursive manner in
volves the cognitive claim made
which that content is presented to us is presumed
by research that has non-discursive and non-conceptual charto betray its irrationality. Yet the phenomena at
acteristics.
work in the artistic domain are decidedly cognitive
and rational, even if we cannot always directly access them via language and concepts. Part of the specificity of art research
therefore lies in the distinctive manner in which the non-conceptual and
non-discursive contents are articulated and communicated.
The epistemological issue of the distinctive character of art
knowledge is also addressed by phenomenology, by hermeneutics, and
by the cognitive sciences. In the work of Maurice
For a discussion of the imporMerleau-Ponty, embodied knowledge is also con- tance of the phenomenological
cretely ‘bodily knowledge’. The a priori of the legacy and its influence on the
body assumes the place of the a priori of intel- cognitive sciences, see the final
section of chapter 7.

48

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 49

lectual knowledge, making the prereflexive bodily intimacy with the
world around us into the foundation of our thinking, acting, and feeling. In the context of the current debate, Merleau-Ponty’s insights have
had strong influence in theatre studies (particularly dance studies; see
e.g. Parviainen 2002) and also in gender studies.
I have already mentioned hermeneutics as a vehicle for accessing
what is at work in art. The fundamental ambiguity of artworks renders
interpretation an unfinished process in which the interpreter and the interpreted temporarily melt together in ever-receding interpretative horizons. This ‘effective history’ (Wirkungsgeschichte), as Hans-Georg
Gadamer has called it, enables the productive interpretation of art research to generate new meanings, embodied in concrete works of art.
Embodied knowledge has also been one of the focuses of research
in the field of cognitive psychology, as in the work of Howard Gardner (1985) on multiple intelligence or that of Hubert Dreyfus (1982) on
artificial intelligence. The zone between cognition and creativity is now
even under exploration in collaborative projects between scientists
and artists.17
In sum, the knowledge embodied in art, which has been variously analysed as tacit, practical knowledge, as ‘knowing-how’, and as
sensory knowledge, is cognitive, though non-conceptual; and it is rational, though non-discursive. The distinctive nature of the knowledge
content has been analysed in depth in phenomenology, hermeneutics,
and cognitive psychology.
The methodological question
Before I turn to the question of which methods and techniques of investigation are appropriate to research in the arts, and in what respects
they may differ from those in other scholarly domains, it seems wise to
draw a distinction between the terms ‘method’ and ‘methodology’. In
the debate on research in the arts, the term ‘methodology’ is frequently
used at times when one simply means ‘method’ in the singular or plural. Although ‘methodology’ may sound more weighty, the procedures
it refers to can usually be less mystifyingly called ‘methods’. I am fol17. See for example Choreography and Cognition (cc n.d.).

49

The Debate on Research in the Arts

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 50

lowing here the suggestion made by Ken Friedman in an exchange of
views about research training in the arts, when he proposed using
‘methodology’ exclusively to refer to the comparative study of methods.18 A ‘method’ is then simply a well-considered, systematic way of
reaching a particular objective.
The central question here is: Is there a characteristic, privileged
way of obtaining access to the research domain of art practice and the
knowledge embodied in it, a route that could be denoted by the term
‘artistic research’? Under what premises can such research be done, and,
in conjunction with this, should such research orient itself to or conform to approved academic (or scientific) standards and conventions?
Here, too, opinions in the debate differ widely, and it is not always clear
whether a person’s stance is informed by considerations pertinent to the
issue or by motives that are essentially extraneous to art research. Individuals and institutions that have an interest in using partly institutional means to protect their activities, for example against the bureaucratic world of the universities, may be more inclined to adopt an
‘independent’ course than those who are less
The shortest definition of artisafraid of selling their body and soul.
tic research I have come across
One distinction from more mainstream
is used by the Orpheus Institute in Ghent: ‘Artistic research
scholarly research is that research in the arts is
is research where the artist
generally performed by artists. In fact, one could
makes the difference.’
argue that only artists are capable of conducting
such practice-based research. But if that is the
case, objectivity then becomes an urgent concern, as one criterion for
sound academic research is a fundamental indifference as to who performs the research. Any other investigator ought to be able to obtain
the same results under identical conditions. Do artists have privileged
access to the research domain, then? The answer is yes. Because artistic creative processes are inextricably bound up with the creative personality and with the individual, sometimes idiosyncratic gaze of the
artist, research like this can best be performed ‘from within’. Moreover,
the activity at issue here is research in art practice, which implies that
18. See Ken Friedman’s 9 April 2002 contribution to the PhD-Design mailing list (PhDDesign n.d.).

50

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 51

creating and performing are themselves part of the research process –
so who else besides creators and performers would be qualified to
carry them out? Now this blurring of the distinction between subjects
and objects of study becomes further complicated by the fact that the
research is often of partial, or even primary, benefit to the artist-researcher’s own artistic development. Obviously there must be limits. In
cases where the impact of research remains confined to the artist’s own
oeuvre and has no significance for the wider reMuch of the noteworthy research context, then one can justifiably ask search done today is interdisciwhether this qualifies as research in the true sense plinary or transdisciplinary.
New fields of research materiof the word.
alise in a productive combinaJust as with the ontology and epistemology tion of different disciplines, e.g.
of research in the arts, the issue of methodology molecular biology, environmenmay also be further clarified by a comparison tal studies, or science and technology studies. Transdisciplinary
with mainstream scholarship. Taking the broad research extends out of acadeclassification into three academic domains as a mia into other life domains, and
reference, we can make the following rough gen- it integrates perspectives from
the ‘wider world’ into the reeralisations about the different methods associ- search – both in the methodated with them. As a rule, the natural sciences ological and epistemological
have an empirical-deductive orientation; that is, senses and in the valorisation of
the research. In chapter 4, pages
their methods are experimental and are designed 91-92, I will investigate to what
to explain phenomena. Experiments and labora- extent artistic research is transtory settings are characteristic of natural science disciplinary; in chapter 11, pages
235-36, I will examine the transresearch. The social sciences are likewise empiri- disciplinary nature of artistic
cally oriented as a rule; their methods are usually research more closely in the
not experimental, however, but are primarily de- context of jar.
signed to describe and analyse data. Quantitative
and qualitative analysis exemplify social science research. One method
developed in the social science disciplines of ethnography and social anthropology is participant observation. This approach acknowledges the
mutual interpenetration of the subject and object of field research, and
might serve to an extent as a model for some types of research in the
arts. The humanities are as a rule more analytically than empirically oriented, and they focus more on interpretation than on description or explanation. Characteristic forms of research in the humanities are historiography, philosophical reflection, and cultural criticism.

51

The Debate on Research in the Arts

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 52

The contrasts and interrelationships with other academic disciplines will be discussed in more
detail in chapter 7.

If we compare various fields of scholarship
with one another and ask (1) whether they are exact or interpretive in nature, (2) whether they seek
to identify universal laws or to understand particular and specific instances, and (3) whether experimentation plays a
part in their research, then we arrive at the following schematic structure.19 Pure mathematics is generally an exact, universally valid, and
non-experimental science. The natural sciences likewise seek to generate exact knowledge that corresponds to universal laws or patterns, but
which, contrary to mathematical knowledge, is often obtained by experimental means. These can be contrasted with art history (to cite just
one example from the humanities), which is not primarily interested
in formulating precise, universal laws, but more in gaining access to the
particular and the singular through interpretation. Experimentation
plays virtually no role there at all.
The distinctive position that arts research occupies in this respect
now comes into view. Research in the arts likewise generally aims at interpreting the particular and the unique, but in this type of research
practical experimentation is an essential element. Hence, the answer to
the question of art research methodology is briefly that the research design incorporates both experimentation and participation in practice
and the interpretation of that practice.
In summary, research in the arts is performed by artists as a rule,
but their research envisages a broader-ranging impact than the development of their own artistry. Unlike other domains of knowledge, art
research employs both experimental and hermeneutic methods in addressing itself to particular and singular products and processes.
If we now take together these explorations of the ontological,
epistemological, and methodological facets of research in the arts and
19. I am indebted here to Nevanlinna (2004). I agree with the author in acknowledging
that the comparison is rather rough. Moreover, especially in view of the evolution of
modern science and recent insights in the philosophy of science, classifications like these
should definitely be viewed with scepticism. For example, it is very common today,
particularly for non-physicists, to point to the incommensurable paradigms of quantum
mechanics, relativity theory, and classical mechanics in order to emphasise the interpretive
nature of scientific knowledge.

52

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 53

condense them into one brief formula, we arrive at the following characterisation:
Art practice – both the art object and the creative process – embodies situated, tacit knowledge that can be revealed and articulated by means of experimentation and interpretation.
In conjunction with the earlier answer to the question of how art practice-as-research can be distinguished from art practice-in-itself, we
now arrive at the following definition:
Art practice qualifies as research if its purpose is to expand our
knowledge and understanding by conducting an original investigation in and through art objects and creative processes. Art research begins by addressing questions that are pertinent in the
research context and in the art world. Researchers employ experimental and hermeneutic methods that reveal and articulate
the tacit knowledge that is situated and embodied in specific artworks and artistic processes. Research processes and outcomes are
documented and disseminated in an appropriate manner to the
research community and the wider public.

Coda: Legitimacy
Research on the supervision of practice-based research projects in the
arts (Hockey and Allen-Collinson 2000; Hockey 2003) has shown
that one difficulty experienced by both PhD candidates and their supervisors lies in the distrust and scepticism of those around them – individuals in their own institutions as well as those in wider circles – with
respect to research of this type. Those involved in art research often have
to ‘sell’ their research as a credible endeavour, and to consume much
time and energy in having to repeatedly explain to all sorts of individuals and authorities what the research involves and what the rationale
of this type of research is. Overcoming institutional barriers and persuading other people claim a disproportionate amount of time, quite
apart from the fact that this usually has little to do with the actual topic
of research. And the burden of proof always rests with the ‘novices’,

53

The Debate on Research in the Arts

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 54

whereas the legitimacy of mainstream academic research is seldom fundamentally challenged.
The issue culminates in the question of whether research in
which the creation of art is intermeshed with the research process is indeed serious scholarly research, and whether it is PhD-worthy (Candlin 2000a, 2000b). Some would argue that although research-like art
practices in themselves can or do have value – a value comparable or
even equivalent to that of scholarly research – we are nevertheless
dealing with two unlike endeavours: true research on the one hand, and
on the other hand an activity that must be kept distinct from research, even if it might be of equivalent value from a societal or other
viewpoint. Opinions differ on this point in the debate on practice-based
doctorates in the arts. Frayling (in ukcge 1997), Strand (deetya 1998),
and others have argued in this connection for introducing the concept
of ‘research equivalence’. I would suspect that
This still remains an issue. Is the
one motive of the ‘research equivalence’ propoSwedish artistic doctorate (konnents may be that practice-based research, with its
stnärlig doktorsexamen) equivalent to, or is it equal to, a PhD?
non-discursive, performative, and artistic qualities, will then no longer have to be ‘sold’.
Because art practices, irrespective of whether
they present themselves as research, are considered of value to our culture, another argument goes, the practitioners perhaps deserve to be rewarded with a higher education degree as well as with funding – but the
name of that degree ought to make clear that it is not based on ‘true’
scholarly research; in other words, it should not be a PhD but some sort
of ‘professional doctorate’. The distinction between PhDs and professional doctorates has existed in the United States for some time. Basically one could argue that the research-oriented academic world in that
country regards professional doctorates as inferior, whereas the professional art world tends to look down on the more ‘academic’ degrees like
MAs and PhDs.
In addition to equivalence, another theme in the PhD-versus-PD
debate in the arts involves the nature and orientation of the doctoral
degree. Those who are inclined to compare research in the arts to endeavours like technical, applied research or design research will be more
likely to argue for a professional doctorate than those who would em-

54

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 55

phasise the kinship between art research and humanities or cultural
studies research. Another proposal, partly aimed at avoiding an unwanted proliferation of titles and to keep the system of degrees transparent, is to introduce a so-called inclusive model (see e.g. ukcge 1997:
20-21). The PhD would then signify that its holder is capable of conducting research at the highest level, but would leave open whether that
was ‘pure’ academic research or practice-based research. The entire spectrum from theoretical research to design research, from the natural sciences to classical studies, from dentistry, food quality management, and
civil engineering to theology, fiscal law, and creative arts, could all be
encompassed within that PhD degree.
The misgivings about the legitimacy of practice-based research
degrees in the creative and performing arts arise mainly because people have trouble taking research seriously which is designed, articulated,
and documented with both discursive and artistic means. The difficulty
lurks in the presumed impossibility of arriving at a more or less objective assessment of the quality of the research – as if a specialised art forum did not already exist alongside the academic one, and as if academic or scientific objectivity itself were an unproblematic notion. In
a certain sense, a discussion is repeating itself here that has already taken
place (and still continues) with respect to the emancipation of the social sciences: the prerogative of the old guard that thinks it holds the
standard of quality against the rights of the newcomers who, by introducing their own field of research, actually alter the current understanding of what scholarship and objectivity are.
If the comparison with the emancipation of the social sciences
is at all valid, then there is still a long way to go. Even after two centuries of debate about the fundamental premise of social science, some
people, both inside and outside the universities, still question the autonomy (and legitimacy) of that domain of knowledge. On the other
hand, the rapid development of a new discipline like cultural studies
may also give cause for optimism. Perhaps I would be going too far to
call for a paradigm shift, but I do know for sure that a shift in thinking is needed in the minds of some people. We knew we would face
tough resistance, and though that may dampen our spirits from time
to time, it is a challenge we can meet.

55

The Debate on Research in the Arts

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 56

Chapter 3

Artistic
Research and
Academia:
An Uneasy
Relationship

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 57

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 58

Context
This chapter is an expanded version of a contribution
I made to ‘Music and Ideas Worldwide: A Symposium
on Practice-Based Research’ held at the Royal College of
Music, London, on 24 October 2007. It enabled me to
put into words some of my experiences during the creation of docartes, the doctorate programme for musicians, as well as to look back at the conference ‘The
Third Cycle: Artistic Research after Bologna’, which
I had organised in Amsterdam’s Felix Meritis centre on
10–11 October 2007. The chapter introduction entitled
‘Artistic Research and Academia’ contains a hidden
polemic with the stances adopted by some Dutch postgraduate institutes. At the end of the chapter, I introduce two themes – contingency and realism – that will
return in chapter 5 and particularly in chapter 7.

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 59

Artistic research and academia
There is something uneasy about the relationship between ‘artistic research’ and the academic world. This has led some people largely to exclude artistic research from the realm of higher education and research
and assign it, instead, to art institutions that serve art practice directly
– such as funding bodies, postgraduate artists’ laboratories, or exhibition venues. It has prompted others to work from within to expand or
redefine the prevailing conception of academic or scientific research
from the perspective of artistic research. Both these strategic and political agendas have their merits, but also their shortcomings.
In the former strategy, artistic research is in danger of becoming
isolated from the settings in which society has institutionalised thinking, reflection, and research – particularly the universities. Under a guise
of artistic nonconformity and sovereignty, some people put up resistance to the supposed disciplining frameworks of higher education and
research. Let us not get into arguing about whether the word ‘research’ can justifiably be used here, or whether the idiosyncratic undertakings and appropriations that are so peculiar to the artistic quest
might better be called explorations and discoveries. It is not uncommon
to see superficial, theory-meagre borrowings from what happens to be
on offer in intellectual life being put to use in artistic production.
In principle, of course, there is nothing wrong with that. After
all, much is permissible in the context of artistic discovery that would
not withstand the test of academic justification (the same can, incidentally, be said of mainstream research as well). Yet the logic and the
internal dynamics of art practice do, in fact, differ from those of most
academic disciplines – which at least keep up the pretension that explorations, findings, and insights need to be somehow connected to theoretical justification or further thought.
The question that needs addressing now is whether this type of
‘research’ (whatever one may think of it otherwise) does not actually
prosper best in educational settings – in this case, institutions of higher
education in the arts. The insistence with which some institutes claiming to conduct artistic research are positioning themselves outside the
sphere of education (often driven by an unfounded, hyped-up Bolognaphobia) leads one to suspect that more is at play than mere oppor-

59

Artistic Research and Academia: An Uneasy Relationship

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 60

tunistic protectionism. The vehement resistance to the ‘education system’ and ‘academisation’ seems also to be fuelled by a limited understanding of what higher education in the arts really is, or could be.
This educational field does have trouble
I used the same wordings in
constantly reinventing itself in confrontation with
drafting the mission statement
the state of the art in practice; ‘academism’ is alof the Amsterdam School of the
Arts (ahk). I am aware that
ways a lurking danger. But at the same time,
there is a difference between a
higher education in the arts is – or ought to be –
task one sets for oneself and the
the place where the cultural past meets current
ways it gets implemented in
practice.
practice, and the future is prepared; questions
are asked that have no answers yet; and respect for
the continuously reassessed wealth of cultural
tradition joins with a keen sense of the urgent and with the exploration
of the uncharted.
Artistic research benefits when carried out in such a context.
Arts education also – fully consistent with Humboldtian ideals – benefits from the inspiration and impulses it receives from developments in artistic research practices. One already distinguishing feature
of arts education (especially compared with what is customary in most
of the higher education system) is its in-house integration of training
with practice, as artists make their current work into part of the educational subject-matter. These bonds with art practice can be tightened further (a constant need) by creating links between artists’ research practices and teaching practices at the academies. A fine
example of such productive alliances may be witnessed in the research
fellowship programmes now operating in the UK and in Norway. A
modest start has been made in the Netherlands, too, by enabling
artists to hold research posts in arts institutes.1
The second strategy of positioning artistic research in academia
is similarly problematic. Hypothetically, the introduction of artistic research into an academic environment could broaden and enrich our
1. I refer here to the Arts and Humanities Research Council Fellowships in the Creative
and Performing Arts (ahrc n.d.), the National Norwegian Artistic Research Fellowships
Programme (narf n.d.), and the Artists in Residence programme (air n.d.) initiated by
the Art Practice and Development Research Group at the Amsterdam School of the Arts.

60

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 61

conception of what academic or scientific research truly is.2 On the face
of it, universities would potentially benefit from the methods and perspectives characteristic of artistic research.3 To give an example, university research traditions as a rule devote little attention to the haphazard manner in which research paths are navigated and research
results actually come about. In terms of both methodology and knowledge dynamics, the focus on the creative process that is characteristic
of research in the arts, as well as the characteristic linkage and interpenetration of artistic practice and theoretical reflection, of doing and
thinking, would be a valuable asset to universities. Furthermore, in artistic ‘knowledge production’, the emphasis lies on non-discursive modes
of world disclosure embodied in concrete artefacts. Hence, in an epistemological sense as well, artistic research would provide a benefit, or
even a correction to what many people regard as the doings and dealings in mainstream science and research.
But this positioning of artistic research also has its shortcomings.
By this I am not referring to the understandable resistance in certain
academic circles (interestingly enough, notably in
In humanities circles, one
disciplines such as art history) to the introduction encounters both opponents and
of practices and mores that, at first glance, violate proponents of the emergent
the received forms of scholarship and academic field of research. Although serious arguments do play a role
craft-work. It might take some getting used to for here, far too often these can be
certain people, but the history of science shows seen to be corrupted by money
that new research objects, methods, and claims al- and power. The new field is perceived as a threat by those who
ways meet resistance. One just needs to steer a fear it will deprive them of
middle course between assimilating with what is funding. It is welcomed by
already there and stressing one’s own particular- those who perceive it as an
academic ally.
ity. In this respect, the current institutional ad2. I use the words ‘academic’ and ‘scientific’ interchangeably here, and both refer to the
traditional university setting. ‘Academia’ and ‘academy’ refer in this essay to the entire
field of higher education and research. Terminological questions like these are not without
import. Science in English has a much more restricted meaning than the Dutch
wetenschap or the German Wissenschaft, as the latter also encompass the humanities. The
German Forschung, by contrast, is more likely to refer to the mores of the natural sciences
than is the case with the Dutch onderzoek or the English research.
3. For an elaborated account, cf. Cobussen 2007.

61

Artistic Research and Academia: An Uneasy Relationship

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 62

vance of artistic research does not differ in essence from the rise of disciplines like sociology, the technological sciences, or, more recently, cultural studies.
No, in referring to the shortcomings of university artistic research
I mean something more fundamental – a fundamental deficiency that
seems immanent in the relationship between art and the university. In
a certain sense, this is even true of the relationship between artistic research and higher education as a whole, hence including institutions
of arts education. It is a deficit in the relationship between the artistic
and the academic. Thus, it almost seems as if the isolationists I was criticising earlier will turn out to be right after all. This deficit is best described as a certain unease, a restlessness, an agitation that arises because
the contingent perspectives offered by artistic research practice are
rather at odds with the quasi-universalistic knowledge claims of the
academy, and even seem irreconcilable with them. Or are they? This is
the question I want to address here.

Practice-based doctoral programme in music
Since 2002, I have been involved in developing and implementing docartes, a practice-based doctoral programme in music. It is a cooperative arrangement involving the Conservatory of Amsterdam, the
Royal Conservatoire of The Hague, and Leiden University (in the
Netherlands) and the KU Leuven Association and Orpheus Institute,
Ghent (in Belgium).4 The doctoral programme is designed for musicians, both composers and instrumentalists, whose research combines
artistic practice with theoretical reflection, and whose artistic and theoretical research results are intended as a contribution both to art
practice itself and to the discourse about it.
In developing the programme, we have made use of insights developed elsewhere in this field. Reports published by the UK Council
for Graduate Education (ukcge 1997; ukcge 2001) on practice-based
doctorates in the creative and performing arts and design were particularly helpful to us as we designed the research environment, put to4. See docartes n.d. for information on the programme and the various doctoral
projects.

62

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 63

gether the programme and constructed the curriculum, determined the
admission and assessment procedures, and arranged for the students’
supervision and guidance.
As it now operates, the programme starts with a two-year research
training course as part of a pathway to the doctorate lasting four to six
years. Meeting ten times a year in monthly sessions of two to three days,
the students report on their work in progress and attend colloquia with
guest artists and/or researchers. Seminars on the philosophy of science
and on artistic research and the aesthetics of music are held, and there
is a hands-on seminar on research in and through
Thirty-nine doctoral candidates
music. Students also learn how to collect data and were enrolled as of November
to present and document their research. The pro- 2011, and four had obtained
gramme is now in its fifth year, and twenty stu- their doctorates. More are to
follow in 2012.
dents are enrolled. The first degrees should be
awarded in 2008.
One matter that requires constant attention is the doctoral candidates’ lack of academic training, particularly in writing skills. As a rule,
their practice-based masters courses at the music colleges have prepared
them inadequately for doing research. This problem is linked to a more
general issue I would like to turn to now: the amount and kind of reflection that ought to be part of a practice-based doctoral course. How
much attention should be devoted to ‘theory’? And what do we mean
by ‘theory’? What kind of theoretical reflection should we expect from
researching artists? And how does that relate to their artistic practice?
At a meeting of the European midas (Music Institutions with
Doctoral Arts Studies) network in Tallinn in May 2006, a central
topic was ‘How much theory can practice bear?’ One participant remarked, provocatively, ‘We’re not trying to train the students as philosophers and make them into some kind of Derrida, are we?’ We teach
artist researchers the apa rules for reference lists, footnotes, and other
style elements. We teach them to write and present academic papers.
We introduce them to the standards of systematic research and the principles of philosophy of science. But could we be starting at the wrong
end? And aren’t we asking too much of our students? Are they meant
to develop into fully fledged scholars, as well as reflective artists?
At the root of these continuing concerns are questions that

63

Artistic Research and Academia: An Uneasy Relationship

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 64

seem inextricably bound up with the practice of artistic research – the
issue of discursivity, the role and meaning of language in research; and
the issue of the relationship between theory and practice. Before I discuss these further, let me highlight two recent occurrences that illustrate
these issues.

Text and theory
In October 2007, the Arts and Humanities Research Council (ahrc
2007) in the UK launched a new research programme called Beyond
Text. This five-year, £5.5-million scheme provides funding for research
projects whose primary focus is on visual communication, sensory perception, orality, and material culture. The programme bears the subtitle Performances, Images, Sounds, Objects. Here, it seems, we have
an initiative directly derived from the intentions of artistic research –
a programme that, by ‘going beyond’ text and taking artistic practice
as its point of departure, assumes a clear stance on the issues addressed
in this chapter. Yet as we delve further into the programme specifications, we read that beyond text does not mean without text. Indeed,
‘while the creation [...] of performances, sounds, images, and objects
[...] is the central concern, their translation [...] through texts remains
key to their investigation.’ Further on, the writer describes Beyond Text
as aiming ‘to enhance connections between those who make and preserve works and those who study them’ (ahrc 2007). So in spite of its
focus on practice, this scheme seems to do more to deepen the gulf between theory and practice than to bridge it. The governing principle
in Beyond Text is still the ‘humanities perspective’, which elevates research on practice above research in and through practice.
On 15 October 2007, the e-mail discussion forum of parip
(Practice as Research in Performance, a Bristol-based project earlier supported by the ahrc) carried an announcement for a forthcoming
event at the University of Manchester entitled ‘The Big Debate: “That’s
Not Research, It’s Art” ’. The forum moderator appended the following comment:
In Bristol we have noted an increasing number of these events and
are somewhat concerned that the terms of reference are not mov-

64

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 65

ing forward. I will not be attending these conferences and symposia, but wonder if those within the old parip communities
might feed in? Particularly in the rae run-up and following the
summer’s ahrc consultation ‘Beyond Text’ it is a little surprising
to see that people feel as though there is still a significant battle
to be won to convince the academy of its validity.5
I am unsure how to read this, but one thing is clear: people (the parip
community) think either that all the work of convincing academia of
the validity of practice-based research in the arts has already been
done (by them?) and the battle is now won, or that the battle has been
lost. Either way, the sense of unease – the uneasy tension between artistic research and the academy – has seemingly vanished. Peace has been
restored, and the feeling of dissonance overcome.
Second occurrence. Also in October 2007. I organised a two-day international conference in Amsterdam entitled ‘The Third Cycle: Artistic Research after Bologna’. During a panel debate, one of the conference speakers, Johan Haarberg, founder of the
The Netherlands Organisation
Norwegian Artistic Research Fellowship Pro- for Scientific Research (nwo),
gramme, was challenged to explain the relation- in cooperation with the Nethership between theory and practice in the pro- lands Foundation for Visual
Arts, Design and Architecture
gramme. ‘No theory!’ was his provocative (bkvb), has meanwhile initiated
assertion. ‘Reflection? Yes. Some degree of con- a doctorate programme for visutextualisation can be expected. But “theory”? No!’ al artists and designers. The development of the third cycle in
The central issue addressed at the Amster- the arts in Europe is the focus of
dam conference was whether and how research the Erasmus academic network
opportunities for artists could be created in the share (Step-Change in Higher
Arts Research and Education);
Netherlands after the masters degree. One of the see also my annotation in chaptalks at the conference described the creation of ter 2, page 35.
a Graduate School at the Berlin University of
the Arts (UdK Berlin), which offers a post-masters course. Neither the Berlin third-cycle course for artists nor the Norwegian programme awards a doctorate (PhD). At the Berlin graduate
5. rae = UK Research Assessment Exercise; see parip list n.d.

65

Artistic Research and Academia: An Uneasy Relationship

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 66

school, that degree is reserved for more traditional disciplines like art
history or music education. Practice-based research by artists such as
musicians is not eligible for recognition as PhD research. This, of
course, reconfirms once more the separation of theory from practice,
and of research on the arts from research in and through the arts. Effectively, artistic research is not regarded here as ‘real’ research
(‘Forschung’), or is seen as a lesser form of it. The Norwegian programme, in contrast, views artistic research as a fully fledged, legitimate
type of research at the third-cycle level.6 The programme is independent of university frameworks and sustained by the arts colleges. Although it does not culminate in a doctoral degree (PhD), it is nonetheless deemed by the state to be of equal standing. The distinguishing
feature of the Norwegian research fellowship programme is that it is
founded not on the criteria for third-cycle research as set by the academic world, but on the question of what artists, as ‘reflective practitioners’, need for successful research practice. And the answer? Well, to
start with, no theory ...

Research and knowledge
What do these two illustrations tell us? To begin with, we can at least
gather from them that a debate is still in progress about the issues of
discursivity and the relation between theory and practice – topics that
generate a certain apprehensiveness and agitation both inside academia
and outside it, in the world of art. Is this merely a temporary feeling
of nervousness and unease that will dissipate once the struggle is over?
That is, will it go away as soon as practice-based research in the arts –
research in and through art practice – has become a well-respected academic instance of an ‘original investigation undertaken to gain knowledge and understanding’?7 No, in my view there are good reasons to
maintain that we are not dealing here with a transitory sense of unease.
6. For political reasons, however, the programme avoids using the word forskning
(research) in its Norwegian texts, employing instead the term kunstnerisk utviklingsarbeid
(artistic development work). The Swedish Research Council, in comparison, has been
supporting research projects under the designation konstnärlig forskning och utveckling
(artistic research and development) since 2003. See also my observations in note 2 in this
chapter about variations of meaning between different languages.

66

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 67

But before I say any more about the reasons why we should actually preserve a degree of restlessness and unease in the relations between artistic research and academia, I would like to make a few comments on
why, after fifteen years of debate about research in the arts and about
its institutional context, there are also good reasons to argue that some
things have changed.
First there is the concept of research. Gradual but noticeable liberalisation has occurred in recent decades in terms of what is understood
by ‘research’ in the academic world. Recent evidence for this is seen in
the definition of research given by the European Joint Quality Initiative in its Dublin Descriptors for third-cycle education:
The word [research] is used in an inclusive way to accommodate
the range of activities that support original and innovative work
in the whole range of academic, professional and technological
fields, including the humanities, and traditional, performing, and
other creative arts. It is not used in any limited or restricted sense,
or relating solely to a traditional ‘scientific method’.8
Research institutions and funding bodies, such as the Higher Education Funding Council for England (hefce) and the ahrc, maintain
similarly ‘inclusive’ definitions of research, which ostensibly allow
room for research taking place outside the established parameters of the
natural sciences, social sciences, and humanities. In practice, however,
the situation is more difficult, especially in the rat race for research funding, where such ‘newfangled’ activities as artistic research still tend to
lose out.
7. The definition of research used by the Higher Education Funding Council for England (hefce) in its Research Assessment Exercise is: ‘“Research” for the purpose of the
rae is to be understood as original investigation undertaken in order to gain knowledge
and understanding. It includes work of direct relevance to the needs of commerce, industry, and to the public and voluntary sectors; scholarship; the invention and generation of
ideas, images, performances, artefacts including design, where these lead to new or substantially improved insights; and the use of existing knowledge in experimental development to produce new or substantially improved materials, devices, products and
processes, including design and construction.’
8. See jqi 2004.

67

Artistic Research and Academia: An Uneasy Relationship

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 68

Chapter 4 will deal more extensively with the place of artistic
research within the realm of science and technology, as well as
with the possible kinship between artistic research and
Mode 2 knowledge production.

A further sign of the changing research
landscape is the diminishing authority of the hierarchy of basic research, applied research, and experimental development, concepts defined in the
Frascati Manual (oecd 2002), a publication of
the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development containing standards for surveys on research and development. Changes like this are partly attributable to the emergence and
recognition of other forms of knowledge production. In particular, the
phenomenon known as Mode 2 knowledge production has upset the
traditional ways of thinking about the social and intellectual organisation of research. Mode 2 research is characterised by being carried out
in contexts of application; it is predominantly interdisciplinary or
transdisciplinary; it has no epistemological core and is methodologically
pluralistic; and the direction and quality of the research is not determined by disciplinary peers alone.9
At a more theoretical, philosophical level these broader conceptualisations of research, and the accompanying shifts in research policy, have coincided with the liberation of knowledge forms and research
strategies that are also capable of grasping what takes place in artistic
research. At an epistemological level, one notices a growing interest (also
in some ‘traditional’ knowledge domains) in the implicit, tacit knowledge that plays a part in our interaction with the world, in our actions
and speech. Many scholars in such divergent disciplines as the cognitive sciences, phenomenology, and philosophy of mind consider the embodied (sometimes even bodily) non-conceptual or preconceptual
forms of experience and knowledge to be a kind of a priori that underlies the ways in which we constitute and unConstructivist realism
derstand the world and reveal it to one another.
And precisely these forms of experience and
knowledge are embodied in artworks and practices, and play a part in
both their production and their reception. Artistic research is the de9. See Gibbons et al. 1994. I write more about this in ‘The Mode of Knowledge
Production in Artistic Research’, in Gehm et al. 2007, pp. 73-80, [and in chapter 4
below].

68

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 69

liberate articulation of such non-discursive forms of experience and
knowledge in and through the creation of art. The intertwinement of
ontological, epistemological, and methodological perspectives – the circumstance that defining an object is always at once both an epistemic
act and an indication of ways to gain access to it – suggests not only
that artistic practices and creative processes are themselves the most suitable instruments of artistic research. It also implies that the most effective way of articulating, documenting, communicating, and disseminating the research results is not the dominant discursive one, but
the way that uses the medium itself as its mode of expression. One need
not deny the inescapability of language to still give primacy to the art
itself in the research process and as the research outcome. Discursive expressions may accompany the research, but they
This ‘imitative’ form of discurcan never take the place of the artistic ‘reasoning’. sivity is addressed, with referAt best, they can ‘imitate’, suggest, or allude to ence to Adorno, in chapter 7,
what is being ventured in the artistic research, or pages 154 and 168.
can be employed in a post hoc reconstruction of
the research process.
It has meanwhile become a philosophical commonplace to say
that there is no ultimate epistemological ground for our beliefs and
knowledge claims, and that the edifice of science and research has been
built on unstable ground. This is mirrored in a methodological pluralism and fallibilism whereby no rule has the final word, and where
research pathways have been liberated that – without sinking into
scepticism or relativism – have taken leave of the rigid opposition of
subject and object of research, of fact and value, of action and interpretation. And it is precisely this type of methodology – which allows
for the intertwinement of researcher and researched, object and objective, and practice and theory – that seems the most suitable framework for conducting artistic research.
The broadening of what we understand by research, the emancipation of non-discursive knowledge contents, and the growing appreciation of unconventional research methods all point to a more open
and encompassing understanding of what sciCf. my annotation about this
ence, university, and academia are. This ‘liberal- ‘agenda’ of artistic research on
isation’ is reflected in the fact that the highest de- page 44 in chapter 2.

69

Artistic Research and Academia: An Uneasy Relationship

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 70

gree in higher education, the PhD (which up to the nineteenth century,
incidentally, was reserved for practice-oriented, protected professions
in theology, medicine, and law) is increasingly no longer understood
in terms of the fulfilment of specific academic criteria, but as a manifestation of a level of competence, irrespective of its domain and with
due regard for the specific nature of the research objects, claims, and
methods that are prevalent in that domain (cf. ukcge 1997). And although resistance to this ‘liberalisation’ is still evident in some quarters,
the expectation is that there, too, the awareness will dawn that research
in and through art is a legitimate form of doctoral research.
In sum, after fifteen years of debate on the institutional and theoretical place of research in and through the arts, it now looks as if no
fundamental obstacles exist to admitting this type of research to the
ranks of the higher education and research establishment, and no
longer any reason to feel uneasy about how artistic research relates to
academia. At least, so it would seem.

Contingency and realism
What I am arguing here, though, is that the sense of unease and concern is more fundamental, and somehow inextricably bound up with
the relationship between the artistic and the academic. There is something about the arts, and hence also about artistic research, that generates this uneasy, apprehensive feeling. In conclusion, let me focus on
that ‘something’.
Artistic practices are reflective practices, and that is what motivates artistic research in the first place. And this is not just because artists
are now increasingly forced by external circumstances to position and
contextualise their work and, as it were, justify it to funding bodies and
to the public. The reflexive nature of contemporary art also lies enclosed
in contemporary art itself. This art accepts no natural law; cannot base
itself on an aesthetic foundation; has lost its normality; and makes its
own rules. It is an art that continuously starts anew at every level, from
the organisation of the material to the reality presented. This art is not
only caught in the grip of autonomy and loss of function (Peter
Bürger), but has also necessarily become transcendental. And this
theme of art’s conditions of possibility is not only an aberration from

70

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 71

an introverted modernism – which was bid farewell as postmodernism
made its merry entrée – but it has been characteristic of all contemporary art since Hegel’s time. This is the inescapably abstract and reflexive quality of all art: that it traded (even behind the artists’ backs)
its overemphatic representations, created in the naivety of imitation and
expression, for the contingent perspectives that stir our thinking in everchanging ways. Art (not only conceptual art) is also thinking, albeit of
a special kind.
This kind of matter-mediated reflection has much in common
with philosophical reflection. And that is a more compelling justification for the title of philosophiæ doctor than merely arguing for ‘research
equivalence’ for a doctorate in the arts – the idea that practice-based research in the arts is just as PhD-worthy as any other academic discipline.
But the philosophy involved here is one that sees itself as an un-academic philosophy, as speculative philosophy. This artistic reflection, like
philosophy, is a quasi-transcendental undertaking because it bears
upon the foundations of our perception, our understanding, and our
relationship to the world and other people. Art is thought, not theory.
It actually seeks to postpone ‘theory’, to reroute judgments, opinions,
and conclusions, and even to delay or suspend them indefinitely. Delaying, pausing, suspending, waiting – this ‘modesty’ now even necessarily characterises those unambiguous forms of art that want to be understood like this and not in any other way. Art says: ‘It can also be
different...’ Artistic research is the deliberate articulation of this unfinished material thinking. This reinforces the contingent perspectives
and world disclosures it imparts. In the debate on the epistemology of
artistic research, an antithesis repeatedly surfaces: between explicit, manifest knowledge and implicit or tacit knowledge, and between knowing that something is the case and knowing how
‘We don’t know exactly what we
to do or make something. I propose to add a third don’t yet know.’
side to this: not knowing. ‘I don’t know...’ This is Hans-Jörg Rheinberger (see
the more interesting position: not to know, or not chapter 9).
to know yet. It creates room for that which is unthought, that which is unexpected: the idea that all things could be different… This is what we may call the radical contingency of artistic research.

71

Artistic Research and Academia: An Uneasy Relationship

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 72

How much theory does artistic research need? Well, we should
not say: ‘Here is a theory that sheds light on artistic practice’, but ‘Here
is art that invites us to think.’ Immanuel Kant described the aesthetic
idea as a ‘representation of the imagination which induces much
thought, yet without the possibility of any definite thought whatever,
i.e., concept, being adequate to it, and which language, consequently,
can never get quite on level terms with or render completely intelligible’.10 This eighteenth-century expression of what the philosophy of
mind would now call ‘non-conceptual content’ encompasses more
than just the tacit knowledge embodied in the skilfulness of artistic
work. That ‘more’ is the ability of art – deliberately articulated in artistic research – to impart and evoke fundamental ideas and perspectives
that disclose the world for us and, at the same time, render that world
into what it is or can be. If some form of mimesis does exist in art, it
is here: in the force, at once perspectivist and perConstructivist realism
formative, by which art offers us new experiences, outlooks, and insights that bear on our relationship to the world and to ourselves. This
The notions of non-conceptualarticulation of the world we live in is what we
ism, realism and contingency will
may call the radical realism of artistic research.
develop further throughout the
chapters of this book, culminatThe kind of reflection that artistic research
ing in a tentative, still imperfect
is, the contingent perspectives it delivers, its performulation at the close of
formative power, and the realism it brings to bear
chapter 7. Work remains to be
done here.
– all these make artistic research into a distinctive
instrument that will not readily conform to the
established mores and conventions in the more traditional academic
world. This is the fundamental uneasiness and restlessness that haunts
relations between the artistic and the academic. But if the university,
if academia, is willing and able to incorporate these unstable, uneasy
attributes into its midst – along with the non-discursive artistic research
practices – then we can say that progress has been made. Hence, the
10. In Kant 1978 [1790/93], The Critique of Judgement (Kritik der Urteilskraft), § 49. The
German passage is: ‘Unter einer ästhetischen Idee [...] verstehe ich diejenige Vorstellung
der Einbildungskraft, die viel zu denken veranlaßt, ohne daß ihr doch irgendein bestimmter Gedanke, d.i. Begriff, adäquat sein kann, die folglich keine Sprache völlig erreicht und
verständlich machen kann.’

72

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 73

question is not ‘What is artistic research?’ but ‘What is academia?’
Christopher Frayling (2006: xiv) recently made the following appeal:
‘It is timely, in my view, to redefine and re-evaluate the academy – to
emphasise the radical nature of some of its elements. Towards a radical academy.’ This radical academy, to be sure, will always, to some extent, be characterised by restlessness – by a reflective, but also productive, state of unease and agitation.

73

Artistic Research and Academia: An Uneasy Relationship

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 74

Chapter 4

Artistic
Research
within the
Fields of
Science

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 75

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 76

Context
This chapter was born of bewilderment and unease.
I was bewildered about how artistic research was mentioned only in passing in the Frascati Manual and then
shoved aside. I was uneasy both about the negative attitude towards artistic research that prevailed in levels of
authority in Dutch arts schools as well as about the line
adopted by officials and government advisers, who felt
they needed to protect ‘research’ from appropriation by
others. My work in the Strategic Working Group on
Research in the Netherlands Association of Universities
of Applied Sciences (hbo-Raad) enabled me to probe
into issues of research policy, in particular as regards the
form and dynamics of knowledge production. My bewilderment and unease are echoed by the rhetorical tone
in which I presented and arranged the chapter’s sections.

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 77

So ‘artistic research’ was already
known by the 1970s. The expression is not new, at any rate.
A future historiography of artistic research will have to determine what this term was intended to mean in the period in
question.

Imagine the following scene. Back in the 1970s,
somewhere in the vast unesco complex in Paris,
a public servant is cogitating one day about
whether ‘artistic research’ should or should not
belong to the field of science and technology,
and specifically to ‘research and development’.
That official (assuming there is no more than one) is preparing the
thirty-fourth agenda point for the Twentieth unesco General Conference, to convene in October and November 1978. Agenda point 34
is entitled Draft Recommendation concerning the International Standardization of Statistics on Science and Technology. The preamble to
the ultimate recommendation (unesco 1979: 23) will state that
it is highly desirable for the national authorities responsible for
collecting and communicating statistics relating to science and
technology to be guided by certain standards in the matter of definitions, classifications and presentation, in order to improve the
international comparability of such statistics.1
Part of the recommendation deals with the various ways in which
member states should classify data in research and development.
One approach is to categorise it in terms of the ‘fields of science and
technology in which institutions belonging to the higher education
and general service sectors carry out […] research and development
[activities]’ (unesco 1979: 27). This classification – later to be known
as the ‘distribution list’ – contains the following main categories:
1. Natural sciences
2. Engineering and technology
3. Medical sciences
4. Agricultural sciences
5. Social sciences and humanities.

1. The text put before the delegates was later published in Annex 1 to the Resolutions of
the conference (unesco 1979).

77

Artistic Research within the Fields of Science

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 78

The recommendation further specifies which disciplines each of these
areas should encompass. Natural sciences, for instance, includes ‘astronomy, bacteriology, biochemistry, biology, botany, chemistry, computer sciences [… and] other allied subjects’. Social sciences and humanities is divided into two groups. Group II, the humanities, includes
languages, philosophy, history, religion, as well as arts; the latter are further elaborated as follows: ‘history of the arts and art criticism, excluding
artistic “research” of any kind’ (emphasis added).
So at some point thirty years ago in Paris, someone decided that
artistic research should be categorically banned from the field of endeavour known worldwide as research and development. And to prevent any misunderstanding – should anyone claim that some form of
artistic research might qualify as research and development after all –
the exclusion was reinforced by adding ‘of any kind’, and the activity
was negated yet again as a legitimate form of research by putting ‘research’ into inverted commas (which were rare in the rest of the text).
In other words, no one should ever think this is real research, even
though the term might be occasionally so misused.
Since 1979, the distribution list of science and technology fields has
been an authoritative standard in the international world of institutions
devoted to science and technology and to research and development. With
a few minor changes, the list was later incorporated into the Frascati Manual (oecd 2002), a publication of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development dealing with ‘standard practice for surveys on
research and experimental development’. The definitions and classifications laid down in the Frascati Manual now serve as the reference categories
when it comes to describing and defining what research and development
are. All self-respecting research institutes, and universities in particular,
now use the manual as a guideline for their actions.
The Frascati Manual’s distribution list (oecd 2002: 67) classifies
Humanities as a separate category alongside Social Sciences, and subdivides it as follows:
• History
• Languages and literature
• Other humanities.

78

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 79

‘Other humanities’ is further specified as ‘philosophy (including the history of science and technology), arts, history of art, art criticism, painting, sculpture, musicology, dramatic art excluding
artistic “research” of any kind, religion, theology
[…]’(emphasis added). The modifications are
noteworthy and odd, but they need no further
comment here. The issue I am highlighting is the
insistence with which artistic research is excluded
here once again from the domain of research and
development.
So what is actually wrong with artistic research to trigger such vehement reactions? Is it
perceived as a threat? To what, to whom?

Artistic research versus
scientific research

In 2007, the oecd Working
Party of National Experts on
Science and Technology Indicators (nesti) published a Revised
Field of Science and Technology
(fos) Classification. It was created in response to the emergence
of new fields of research like
biotechnology and nanotechnology, including some interdisciplinary fields. It continued to
classify arts research in a rather
odd way (see the final section of
this chapter). In the meantime,
some have proposed ranking the
arts at a higher level in the classification, placed on a par with
the current six principal domains, rather than subsumed
under one of them. Artistic research is certainly akin to the
humanities at times, but sometimes also to the field of science
and technology or to the social
sciences. In November 2010, the
Department of Higher Education Analysis of the Swedish National Agency for Higher Education submitted such a proposal to nesti.

In the past ten to fifteen years, much has been
said and written about artistic research, in relation
to both philosophy of science and educational
politics. A recurrent theme is to compare it with,
or distinguish it from, what is generally understood as scientific or academic research. Can we
identify elements of similarity or difference with respect to research in
fields like humanities or natural sciences? Wherein lies the specific nature of artistic research? Is that in the research object – the uniqueness
of artistic practice, of the work of art, of the creative process? Or does
it lie in the research process – in the course it follows, the working procedures, the methods? Or, from a third point of view, does artistic research seek to reveal a special form of knowledge – tacit, practical, nonconceptual, non-discursive, sensory knowledge, as embodied in artistic
products and processes?
In the world of academia, there is a broad degree of agreement
as to what should be understood by research. Briefly it amounts to the
following. Research takes place when a person intends to carry out an
original study, often within a single discipline, to enhance our knowl-

79

Artistic Research within the Fields of Science

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 80

This paragraph brings together
the seven ‘criteria’ from chapter
2 into a single formulation.

edge and understanding. It begins with questions or issues that are relevant in the research
context, and it employs methods that are appropriate to the research and which ensure the validity and reliability of the research findings. An additional requirement is that the research process and the research outcomes be documented and
disseminated in appropriate ways.
Does ‘artistic research’ satisfy these criteria? Ostensibly, at least,
there is much to be said for excluding artistic research on these
grounds. Let us look into it more closely. For one thing, much artistic research is conducted not with the aim of producing knowledge,
but in order to enhance what could be called the artistic universe; as
we know, this involves producing new images, narratives, sounds, or
experiences, and not primarily the production of formal knowledge
or validated insights. Although knowledge and understanding may
well emerge as byproducts of artistic projects,
These three ‘criteria’ – intent,
this is not usually intended from the beginning.
questions, methods – will be disPerhaps more important is that artistic recussed in chapter 7 together
with the four other criteria from
search as a rule does not start off with clearly dechapter 2. At this point, they
fined research questions, topics, or hypotheses
serve as a rhetorical stepping
whose relevance to the research context or to art
stone in order to emphasise below (under ‘Kinship?’) the often
practice has been established beforehand. Much
close relationships between
such research is not ‘hypothesis-led’, but ‘disartistic research and other academic research.
covery-led’ research (Rubidge 2005: 8), in which
the artist undertakes a search on the basis of intuition and trial-and-error, possibly stumbling
across unexpected outcomes or surprising insights or farsights. Moreover, because the researchers are intimately intertwined with what they
are exploring – much artistic research actually serves their own artistic development – they do not have ample distance to the research
topic, a distance that is supposedly an essential condition for achieving a degree of objectivity.
In terms of method – understood as systematic and reliable
working procedures – artistic research also seems to diverge from the
prescriptions set out in methodology manuals. It is the very practice of
unsystematic drifting and searching – of which serendipity, chance in-

80

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 81

spirations, and clues are an integral part – that takes artists onto new,
unbroken ground. They thus do not operate within a well-circumscribed discipline that spells out what may and may not be part of the
research strategy. In artistic research, both the research topic and the research questions and methods tend to become clear only bit by bit during the artistic search, which often transcends disciplines as well.
But does this really differ from ‘scientific research’? As Robbert
Dijkgraaf (2007: 31), an expert on string theory, recently put it, ‘I would
say that scientific research is about doing unpredictable things, implying intuition and some measure of randomness. […] Our research is
more like an exploration than following a firm path.’ The idea that the
‘context of discovery’ is more distinct from the ‘context of justification’
than was claimed by classical philosophy of science up to and including Karl Popper has been substantiated by Thomas Kuhn, Paul Feyerabend, and historians of science that succeeded them. In this light, artistic research may have more in common with scientific research than is
often presumed.

The research hierarchy
Now let us step back for a moment. Research is currently a hot topic
in Europe. In line with the political rhetoric about the knowledge society, the knowledge economy, knowledge management, knowledge circulation, and the like, heavy emphasis is now being put on research and
knowledge production in our society, where the production of goods
and services seems insufficiently competitive in the global economy, especially with the future in mind.
The art world and the field of arts education have also become
afflicted by the research and knowledge virus. It is no longer sufficient
just to master your trade, and from that basis to create beautiful objects, performances, compositions, or events. Artists are what are
now being called ‘reflective practitioners’ (Donald Schön). This
broadening of the artist’s trade can be partly explained by prevailing
external circumstances – the hybrid (‘mixed’) arrangements in which
artists increasingly operate, their need to contextualise and position
their work, their accountability to grant providers and to the public.
Yet the focus on research and reflection can also be partly understood

81

Artistic Research within the Fields of Science

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 82

through developments in art practice itself. Some years ago, Theodor
Adorno (1997 [1970]: 12) observed that ‘today it goes without saying
that nothing concerning art goes without saying, much less without
thinking. Everything about art has become problematic; its inner life,
its relation to society, even its right to exist.’2 The same still applies
in our postmodern times, where it often only seems as though the art
scene is not really worried about its own legitimacy. The current hype
about knowledge and research in the arts is proof of the contrary. It
can be understood as both an attempt to conform to the conditions
that have been imposed on art and artists (an externalist perspective)
and a manifestation of the reflexiveness of the arts themselves (an internalist perspective).
Yet at the same time we also witness here and there, and more
and more, some irritation, or even aversion, arising in the art world and
in arts education against the subject of ‘research’. This can be attributed
mainly to an understandable resistance to the disciplining effects of the
frameworks defined in the academic world for the conduct of research. Artists are on their guard when it comes to issues that could impede their creativity, inventiveness, or freedom. This is not just an inconvenient legacy of an obsolete, late eighteenth-century notion of
artistry (certainly it is that, too, but not that alone). There are good reasons to defend the framework-transcendent, destabilising, sometimes
subversive effects of art against the ineradicable tendency of people and
institutions to frame the unforeseen.
And so the art world, as well as the field of arts education, now
find themselves caught in a balancing act. One minute they profess the
importance and necessity of research and reflection, and the next
minute they resist the real or imagined association with the perceived
oppressive world of science and academia. This is an uncomfortable
predicament, and the discomfort manifests itself in the agitated tone
in which people waver between defending different standpoints.

2. In the German edition: ‘Zur Selbstverständlichkeit wurde, daß nichts, was die Kunst
betrifft, mehr selbstverständlich ist, weder in ihr noch in ihrem Verhältnis zum Ganzen,
nicht einmal ihr Existenzrecht.’

82

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 83

The legitimacy of artistic research is also at issue in an entirely different way, even as artistic research gains a stronger foothold in the system of higher education and research. In the wider debate about research – and notably when it comes to government investment in
higher education and research – artistic research is no party to the discussion at all. The discussion is still first and foremost about investment
in basic scientific research, and preferably in top-rated, ground-breaking research in areas like nanotechnology, biophysics, or subatomic science. Perhaps a slight shift can be seen over the years towards what was
formerly known as applied research and is now often called socially robust, Mode 2, or practice-led research – studies whose research questions do not arise primarily from theoretical curiosity, but from everyday practice. But that does not alter the fact that the largest relative
amount of emphasis and money still goes into types of research that can
be labelled as basic. From this point of view, other research areas, if they
are not outrightly seen as insignificant, at least have less value as investment targets. In this value hierarchy – where socially and culturally
oriented fields like economics and history occupy a mid-range bracket
– doubts are even being expressed about the status of activities that have
managed to gain a place in the universities under names like cultural
studies, media studies, or communications.
As we move down the hierarchy, the word ‘research’ takes on
gradually different meanings (if not to say inferior meanings). And the
activities known as artistic research, which accompany the production
of art, are not at all taken seriously in the world of ‘genuine’ scientific
research. The inverted commas around the word ‘research’ as quoted
from the Frascati Manual say everything. They stand as a warning
against devaluation. Although it may be understandable (they seem to
say) that the respectable status of scientific research tempts people to
present their ‘research’ as scientific or systematic in order to gain an
equivalent standing, this ‘academic drift’ must not obscure the fact that
these are two totally dissimilar domains and activities.
Fortunately, the reasoning continues, the scientific world has selfpurifying mechanisms. Against this tendency to promote any old thing
into ‘research’ and into an academic discipline, there is movement in
the opposite direction. In the ostensibly egalitarianised landscape of uni-

83

Artistic Research within the Fields of Science

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 84

versities and higher professional schools, where at first sight everything
seems to be thrown together into an amorphous mass, the ‘research universities’ are now drawing sharper lines between themselves and the rest,
and the research training programmes are setting themselves apart
from professional training courses. It is argued that achievements at
polytechnics and higher professional schools should no longer be referred to as ‘research’, but as ‘design and development’ (cf. awt 2005).
And that applies to the arts as to none other. After all, aren’t they primarily just involved in designing and producing new artefacts and training artists? They have no reason to annex this commonly understood
word ‘research’; that just raises questions and causes misunderstandings
– again, according to this line of reasoning.
This chapter was also published
in Dutch in Krisis, a journal for
contemporary philosophy
(2009.1: 56-71), in a special issue
on science and technology studies. One reviewer rightly pointed out that the term ‘rational reconstructions’ has particular
connotations in Habermas. To
avoid associations with Habermas’s ideas about the current
tasks of philosophy, it is perhaps
better to use the term ‘rational
justifications’ here.

Kinship?

Let us leave the war of words behind us and concentrate on the essential issue here. What is artistic research all about? We have already seen in the
explorations of artists and scientists – the ‘contexts
of discovery’ – that they have something in common. Their ways of justifying research outcomes,
however, seem highly different at first. Rational reconstructions (logical arguments, empirical-deductive inferences, quantitative and qualitative
analyses, historical-critical interpretations) seem to
have little in common with artistic, aesthetic evaluations. The latter, of course, belong the domain
of art criticism. But some remarkable parallels do exist on closer inspection. For one thing, there is the manner in which a rational reconstruction or an aesthetic evaluation is itself assessed. In neither case is it
possible to invoke an epistemological3 or an aesthetic ground that will
provide the ultimate justification for the research findings. The rules for
assessing the results are not derived from any criterion external to the
research, and hence independent of it. They are defined within the research domain itself. That applies equally to scientific research and to
3. Nowotny, Scott, and Gibbons 2001: 179-200.

84

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 85

Peer review will be addressed
further along in this chapter (on
pages 89-94). It is also (more
polemically) the topic of the
first brief intermezzo in chapter
6. The viewpoints and arguments I have brought together
in this book will ultimately culminate in a framework for the
assessment of artistic research
(chapter 10), which will then be
tested and put into operation in
the peer review guidelines for
the Journal for Artistic Research.

artistic research. The basis for the assessments is
furnished by intersubjective standards which are
shared within what is called a forum, a community of equals. Peer review has just as much authority in the art world as it does in the world of
science. The peers in both realms are very well able
to pass judgments on quality.
But perhaps a more remarkable kinship
between science and art, between scientific research and artistic research, becomes evident
when we view the motives that underlie the research, the issues that inspired it. In both cases (ignoring, for convenience’ sake, false motives like money and power), these are driven
both by a desire for a fundamental understanding and by a desire to develop new products, with the emphasis alternating between the two.
These characteristic motives for conducting research will be discussed
in more detail below. It will suffice for now to point out that both artistic research and scientific research are seeking to broaden our horizons
and to enrich our world.
An additional similarity between scientific and artistic research,
which is at least as important to the present context, is the function that
the research fulfils within the respective professional fields. In both
cases, successful research contributes to the development of the discipline and to the flourishing of talent within it. If there is an intimate
bond between research and development, it is located here. Cuttingedge scientific and artistic research moves the frontier onto previously
unexplored territory by discovering new paths and outlooks, by enabling new observations and experiences. We may therefore understand
artistic research as a careful investigation, exploration, and testing of unbroken ground in function of developing the discipline and broadening perspectives as well as nurturing talent. Both scientific research and
artistic research are capable of constituting worlds and disclosing
worlds; therein lies their performative strength –
Constructivist realism
in generating and revealing new ideas, understandings, perceptions, and experiences.

85

Artistic Research within the Fields of Science

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 86

The standard model of research
and development
The authoritative Frascati Manual (oecd 2002: 30) also provides the
standard definitions of research and development that currently prevail in the world of science and technology. The generic definition is
as follows:
Research and experimental development comprise creative
work undertaken on a systematic basis in order to increase the
stock of knowledge, including knowledge of man, culture and
society, and the use of this stock of knowledge to devise new applications.
The manual goes on to distinguish three activities within this definition: basic research, applied research, and experimental development. It defines these as follows:
Basic research is experimental or theoretical work undertaken
primarily to acquire new knowledge of the underlying foundations of phenomena and observable facts, without any particular application or use in view. Applied research is also original investigation undertaken in order to acquire new
knowledge. It is, however, directed primarily towards a specific
practical aim or objective. Experimental development is systematic work, drawing on existing knowledge gained from research and practical experience, that is directed to producing
new materials, products and devices; to installing new processes,
systems and services; or to improving substantially those already
produced or installed.
This threefold distinction is encountered (always in the same hierarchy) in the mission statements of national and supranational research
organisations that monitor research quality. The League of European
Research Universities, for instance, is ‘committed to the creation of
new knowledge through basic research, which is the ultimate source
for innovation in society’ (leru n.d.). The Royal Netherlands Acad-

86

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 87

The Royal Netherlands Academy
of Arts and Sciences has meanwhile modified its mission statement, removing the hierarchy.
The mission now reads as follows:
‘As the forum, conscience, and
voice of the arts and sciences in
the Netherlands, the Academy
promotes quality in science and
scholarship and strives to ensure
that Dutch scholars and scientists
contribute to cultural, social and
economic progress. As a research
organisation, the Academy is responsible for a group of outstanding national research institutes. It
promotes innovation and knowledge valorisation within these institutes and encourages them to
cooperate with one another and
with university research groups.’
As long as the arts (and research in the arts as I understand it here) have not been integrated into the divisions of the
academy, the word ‘arts’ in this
statement refers to humanities,
law, behavioural sciences, and
social sciences.

emy of Arts and Sciences states in its mission
(which is ‘to ensure the quality of scientific research in the Netherlands’) that ‘the fundamental research carried out today will provide a basis for the applied research of tomorrow and, in
turn, for the practical application of science in
the future’ (knaw n.d.).
The primacy of basic (pure) research over
applied research (including strategic research and
action research) and over experimental development which emanates from these statements can
be traced back to governmental policies as formulated in the final years of the Second World
War, particularly in the United States. In 1945 a
report was published entitled Science: The Endless
Frontier, which was commissioned by President
Franklin D. Roosevelt and written by Vannevar
Bush, director of the Office of Scientific Research
and Development, which had been so important
to the US war effort. Through this agency, Bush
had already demonstrated that investment in (often secret) scientific research had substantially
contributed to winning the war. He was now
Bush’s postulates have been
asked to extrapolate his findings to peacetime. analysed in detail by Donald E.
‘There is […] no reason why the lessons to be Stokes, to whom I am indebted
found in this experiment cannot be profitably here (see below, pages 96-100).
employed in times of peace’ (from Roosevelt’s
commissioning brief, cited in Bush 1945: 3). In his extrapolation, Bush
employed two postulates which together would prove to be a golden
formula: ‘Basic research is performed without thought of practical
ends’ and ‘Basic research is the pacemaker of technological progress’ (pp.
18, 19). This formula – which defines basic scientific research as the motor of technological development, economic growth and public welfare,
while prescribing that it should not be judged directly in terms of utility – represents the conceptual framework that, until recently at least,
has inspired government policies with respect to scientific research in

87

Artistic Research within the Fields of Science

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 88

the Western world. The institutional mission statements quoted above
still bear witness to this.
In recent decades, this conceptual framework has been expanded
a little, as research funders and government bodies have gained more
awareness of research that cannot immediately be associated with basic research, but which both generates knowledge and aims at results
such as designs, images, and performances, and which employs a
broader conception of what qualifies as a scientific method. The Research Assessment Exercise (rae 2005: 34) in the UK, for example, applies the following definition:
‘Research’ […] is to be understood as original investigation undertaken in order to gain knowledge and understanding. It includes
work of direct relevance to the needs of commerce, industry, and
to the public and voluntary sectors; scholarship; the invention and
generation of ideas, images, performances, artefacts including design, where these lead to new or substantially improved insights;
and the use of existing knowledge in experimental development to
produce new or substantially improved materials, devices, products
and processes, including design and construction.
And as part of the Bologna Process to integrate European higher education, the principles known as the Dublin Descriptors (jqi 2004: 3)
emphasise that
the word [research] is used in an inclusive way to accommodate
the range of activities that support original and innovative work
in the whole range of academic, professional and technological
fields, including the humanities, and traditional, performing, and
other creative arts. It is not used in any limited or restricted sense,
or relating solely to a traditional ‘scientific method’.
Notwithstanding this wider concept of research, the standard model remains, for many people, the criterion for demarcating ‘true’ scientific
research from research activities that some still prefer to label as design
and development.

88

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 89

The standard model amended
The standard model of scientific research as set out by Bush and as crystallised in guidelines such as the Frascati Manual has attracted criticism
from various quarters. Research on the history of science and on science policy has shown that the factors now important to technological advancement and economic growth are more complex and multifarious than the standard model would lead us to believe. The
intellectual and social organisation of the sciences in the early twentyfirst century is likewise highly diversified, and different types of knowledge are generated in different specific contexts (Whitley 2000: ix).
In their book The New Production of Knowledge from 1994,
Michael Gibbons and his colleagues sparked considerable debate with
their proposed amendment to this standard model. They described how
‘Mode 1 science’ must now make increasing room for ‘Mode 2 knowledge production’.4 Mode 1 refers to traditional, discipline-bound research that takes place in academic contexts (mostly universities); it is
characterised by organisational homogeneity, uniformity, and stability.
The quality of Mode 1 research – which is primarily focused on the
finding of truths or the justification of beliefs – is assessed and controlled within each discipline by a peer review system, in which largely
individual contributions are assessed by colleagues who are considered
competent to judge quality by virtue of their own previous individual
contributions.
Mode 2 research, in contrast, is said to take place in the ‘context of application’. It is interdisciplinary or transdisciplinary, involving both academics and other parties. Research is not conducted exclusively in homogeneous, uniformly structured universities, but is
more localised in heterogeneous, diversified, often transitory configurations, made up of universities, governmental agencies, industrial research centres, non-governmental organisations, and other actors that
assemble around a particular set of problems. Specific attention is given
to whether the outcomes are socially, economically, or politically relevant, competitive, or feasible. The quality of the research is assessed
4. Gibbons et al. 1994; see also the sequels to this work, Nowotny, Scott, and Gibbons
2001 and 2003.

89

Artistic Research within the Fields of Science

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 90

and controlled by the various parties involved. Both ‘disciplinary
peers’ and other stakeholders critically examine research questions
and priorities as well as findings. This ‘extended peer review’ is one of
the attributes that distinguish Mode 2 knowledge production, in conjunction with the demand for social robustness and reflexivity, the organisational diversity, and the problem-focused teamwork that transcends disciplines.
The Frascati Manual defines six fields of science: natural sciences,
engineering and technology, medical sciences, agricultural sciences, social sciences, and humanities. The first five areas dominate the science
debate. Although Gibbons and his coauthors did pay some heed to the
status and role of the humanities in the academic system, they focused
mainly on new developments in such areas as biomedical sciences, information technology, and environmental studies.
Whitley: ‘Previously combined
That makes it difficult to determine whether,
in the universities, the humaniand if so how, an activity like artistic research
ties have largely remained there
while natural science, and some
might be understood within the entire realm of
of the social sciences, developed
‘knowledge production’. The growing institua considerable degree of institutional and intellectual autonomy of scientific retional autonomy from academic
ideals and structures. This ausearch vis-à-vis academic research in the humantonomy and correlative prestige
ities (Whitley 2000: 278)5 has sharpened the
has increased the degree of dependence between scientific
contrast between ‘scientific’ knowledge and other
fields and sharpened the distinctypes of knowledge and understanding, thus furtion between scientific knowlther complicating any comparison. Artistic reedge and other forms of understanding. [The natural sciences]
search has only just begun its ‘academic advance’,
have today become a separate
and much of this research still takes place in ininstitutional entity claiming
stitutions of higher arts education that are orconsiderable resources and a
monopoly over truth producganisationally and intellectually rather segregated
tion and validation.’
from the rest of the academic and university
world. Furthermore, its claim to have a unique research object, a specific kind of embodied knowledge, and a distinct
methodological framework [see chapter 2 above] has kept artistic research outside the debate from the very beginning. On closer inspec5. Whitley opposes here ‘scientific’ research – increasingly accommodated in autonomous
research institutes – to ‘academic’ research in universities.

90

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 91

It is curious to observe that
some European universities of
applied sciences have attempted
to describe the kind of applied
research done there by citing
Gibbons’s Mode 2 knowledge
production, whereas an agency
such as the Advisory Council
for Science and Technology Policy (awt) in the Netherlands by
contrast has invoked Stokes’s
quadrant model (see below, page
98 in this chapter) to argue that
activities like this amounts to
‘design and development’ and
not ‘research’.

tion, artistic research does not even readily fit into
the Mode 1/Mode 2 dichotomy of knowledge production as proposed in Gibbons et al. With a bit
of goodwill, artistic research can sometimes be
understood within the frameworks of traditional
Mode 1 academic research, and at other times as a
prime example of Mode 2 ‘knowledge production’ – depending on which topics, questions, objectives, and methods of research have been chosen. In the discussion that follows I will examine
to what extent the five characteristics of Mode 2
knowledge production – context of application,
transdisciplinarity, heterogeneity and diversity, accountability and reflexivity, and extended peer review – may be pertinent to artistic research.

Artistic research and Mode 2 knowledge
production
Owing to its close ties with the art world and with art criticism, artistic research is not primarily an academic (university) matter, but is carried out in what Gibbons et al., in their descripContext of application
tion of Mode 2, call the ‘context of application’.
The research questions and topics, the methods,
and the means of documenting and communicating the research are often motivated by what seems appropriate within art practice – a practice which, since it transects the realms of knowledge, morality (politics), beauty, and daily life, has its own dynamic and logic that cannot
be corralled into traditional academic structures. Yet all this notwithstanding, artistic research can sometimes very well be understood as
purely disciplinary experimental research into the aesthetic and formal
qualities and universal regularities of elements that constitute an artwork or creative process. Materials research is one example, and so are
the more conceptual research practices in traditions like fundamental
art, experimental theatre, or electronic music.
If multidisciplinary research is understood as collaboration between different disciplines around a particular topic, whereby the
theoretical premises and working methods of the separate disciplines

91

Artistic Research within the Fields of Science

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 92

remain intact (typical of many art-science collaborations), then interdisciplinary or transdisciplinary research is characterised by a partial
interpenetration of practice, theory, and method, in response to research questions arising from highly specific, local contexts. Especially
the type of artistic research that combines the aesthetic project and the
creative process with questions and topics from broader areas of life
(such as globalisation, identity, gender, or mediality, to mention some
common ones) may be characterised as transdisciplinary research if the
synthesis achieved in the artwork has something additional (or different) to offer, both conceptually and perceptually, as compared to the
outcome that would have resulted from a disciplinary approach. Such
transdisciplinary research is characterised by a relinquishment of one’s
own specific (epistemological or aesthetic) disciplinary ground (which
wasn’t there anyway), a continual adaptation of the recursive research
process based on the input from the various fields of endeavour, and a
certain pragmatism and diversity in the choice of concepts and methods. In the creation of images, sounds, narratives, and experiences, the
research delivers context-related knowledge and understandings of the
life domains it touches upon. But, as pointed out above in relation to
the research context, intradisciplinary research (research operating
within the frameworks defined by a particular discipline) is also very
common in the realm of the arts. For instance, research in performance
practice on the performance practice of historical music, or choreographic research in and on specific movement repertoires, often cannot
be, and does not wish to be, understood as research that transcends disciplines. Hence, transdisciplinarity, the second attribute of Mode 2
knowledge production, is also not wholly compatible with what we understand by artistic research.
The remarkable growth in the number of collaborative ventures involving artists and scientists, artists and civic organisations or
communities, or artists and businesses, seems to point towards a heterogeneous, diversified organisation of artistic research. Research no
longer takes place exclusively in studios, rehearsal rooms, and workspaces, but also ‘on site’ – in the communities and settings where the
collaboration arose. Many of the research findings, too, are disseminated

Transdisciplinarity

92

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 93

beyond theatres, concert halls, and museums.
Heterogeneity and diversity
Nevertheless, heterogeneity and organisational
diversity are still not distinguishing characteristics
of artistic research. The bulk of the creation and transfer of knowledge
and understandings which are articulated in artistic research still occurs
in settings built or fitted out for artists – in places like studios, theatres,
filmhouses, music venues, performance spaces, and galleries, which, for
all their differences, are characterised by a certain organisational homogeneity and similarity. Obviously there are also ‘alternative
providers’: creative workspaces, informal artspaces and organisations,
fringe venues, and other locations. But such organisations and venues
in the margins of the art world demarcate the mainstream. The institutional and social partitions between art practice, scientific practice,
and moral practice that arose in the eighteenth century can still be seen
today in the relative homogeneity and uniformity of the organisations
and spaces where these practices are carried out.
Social accountability and reflexivity – that is, an awareness of the
impact that research has (or might have) on the public sphere, and the
associated feedback that may influence the choice of research topic, the
direction of the research, and the interpretation and communication
of the findings – are further characteristics of the
Accountability and reflexivity
type of research that Gibbons et al. call Mode 2.
When the aim (to use Marx’s words) is not just to
interpret the world but to change it, then the research agenda is determined not only by the challenges arising within a discipline, but by
the demands of the surrounding contexts as well. Yet the agenda of artistic research seems to run counter to this kind of accountability and reflexivity. Art often takes an antithetical stance towards the existing
world, and it delivers the unsolicited and the unexpected. That is its very
strength. At the same time, engagement and reflexivity are inseparably
bound up with the production of art – not in the form of demand and
supply, but in the conveyance of a ‘narrative’ in the materiality of the
medium which can be understood as a commentary on what we have
here and now and as an opening to the ‘other’, the unknown. That applies equally to text theatre as to the most abstract kinds of music. The
performative, world-constituting, and world-revealing power of art lies

93

Artistic Research within the Fields of Science

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 94

in its ability to disclose to us new vistas, experiences, and insights that
bear upon our relationship with the world and with ourselves.
On the assessment of quality in artistic research I have already
made some remarks above. Just as peer review is the basis of quality control in the scientific world, the art world also conducts its own form of
‘peer review’. The prominent role played today by mediators like curators, programmers, and critics might make us forget that the artists
themselves ultimately also belong to the ‘forum of equals’ that determines what matters and what doesn’t, what has quality and what does
not. As we have seen, Mode 2 research is subject
Extended peer review
to extended peer review – the value and quality of
the research is judged by the stakeholders involved in the research process. To a certain extent, the same is true of
artistic research, albeit mainly where collaboration with others takes
place or where the research is done in the service of others or is commissioned by them. And in activities like doctoral research, the tendency
is to involve academics as well as artists in evaluating the artistic research,
since they have qualified themselves in assessing the merits of the discursive practice that accompanies the research. This is not the right place
to discuss this type of extended peer review. By and large, though, the
quality of artistic research is judged by the art field itself, as is customary in Mode 1. The fact that artists use other channels for this than academic articles in top-ranking journals does not alter this principle.
The five characteristics of Mode 2 knowledge production – context of
application, transdisciplinarity, heterogeneity and diversity, accountability
and reflexivity, and extended peer review – thus apply to artistic research
only some of the time, and usually not at all or only partially. What can
we learn from this? In one way, it could give support to the argument
that artistic ‘research’ was kept out of the Frascati Manual for good reason. If it really does differ so much from Mode 2 research (and from
Mode 1 research as well), then one might be justified in asking whether
it is even research at all in the real sense of the word. Its context is entirely different – the context of the art world, not that of science or technology. Academic research on art (as performed in the meanwhile wellestablished humanities disciplines) is certainly a respectable undertaking,

94

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 95

but even though sports sciences and political sciences also have their own
places in the university system, no one would dream of elevating sports
or politics per se to the status of research activities. Mutatis mutandis, that
should apply to the arts as well, however reflexive or exploratory their
practices might be. Hence, the interdisciplinary or transdisciplinary nature of many artistic practices, their organisational diversity, their engagement with other life domains, and their quality assessment procedures would not be sufficient grounds in themselves for lifting ‘artistic
research’ to the level of academic or scientific research.
A second, opposing conclusion can also be argued. The sui
generis nature of artistic research practices can actually be seen as casting a critical light on the very dichotomy between Mode 1 and Mode
2 as put forward in Gibbons et al. That dichotomy has already been criticised from various quarters (e.g. Whitley 2000) as excessively rigid. It
does insufficient justice to the divergent ways in which knowledge and
understandings are defined, generated, and disseminated in the widely
different domains of research and development. The dissimilarities between academic disciplines as biotechnology, economics, historiography, and law are so great in terms of epistemology, methodology, internal dynamics, and social organisation that it is hard to identify
either Mode 1 or Mode 2 research there. From this point of view, artistic research practice differs no more from the practices in laboratories
or cultural historiography than the latter differ from econometrics or
architecture. There are therefore no good reasons to exclude artistic research from the broad domain of academic and technological endeavour, or of research and development in the sense of the Frascati Manual. In fact, even though artistic research may not always be easy to
incorporate into existing disciplinary or academic structures, its distinctive ontological, epistemological, and methodological framework,
its social and intellectual organisation, and its specific forms of engagement, talent development, and quality control all serve to highlight
what academic research could also potentially be – a thorough and sensitive investigation, exploration, and mobilisation of the affective and
cognitive propensities of the human mind in their coherence, and of
the artistic products of that mind. This means that artistic research,
through its quest for fundamental understanding, is equally dedicated

95

Artistic Research within the Fields of Science

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 96

to broadening our perspectives and enriching our minds as it is to enriching our world with new images, narratives, sounds, and experiences.

Artistic research and Pasteur’s quadrant
In an attempt to give artistic research a ‘home’ in academia, some people compare it to the kinds of applied research and experimental development we encounter in the field of engineering and technology;
others compare it with the socially engaged strategic and action research
more readily associated with the project of social engineering in the applied social sciences; and still others liken it to the search for fundamental understandings of specific phenomena which is characteristic
of the humanities. Yet all such attempts remain caught up in the standard model of basic research, applied research, and experimental development that has been widely accepted since Bush and is codified by
the Frascati Manual. As we have seen above, this model was criticised
in Gibbons et al. for its limited capacity to describe the value of the
types of research that are the motor of technological innovation and
economic growth. In particular, the priority given to basic research over
applied research and experimental development is seen to no longer reflect the diverse reality in the science system, where the relatively autonomous Mode 2 knowledge production is gaining increasing ground.
In his book Pasteur’s Quadrant: Basic Science and Technological Innovation, Donald E. Stokes (1997) likewise opened the attack on the
standard model of scientific research and development. He followed a
different line of reasoning, however – one that might be better suited
to understanding artistic research within the framework of research and
development. In his criticism of the standard model, Stokes identifies
two aspects of the model which he argues are dominant. He sees these
as direct consequences of Bush’s golden formula that basic research is
the pacemaker of technological progress, and is performed without
thought of practical ends. The first aspect concerns the model’s orientation; its point of departure is basic research. This is viewed as the original source and motor both to progress in science and to offshoots of
basic research like the more applied research and experimental development of new products that are important to economic and social life.
As pointed out above, the ascendancy of basic research over applied re-

96

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 97

search and experimental development is still recognisable in the mission statements of national and supranational research institutions. As
a constraining paradigm both inside and outside the academic world,
it continues to dominate the minds of many. The accomplishment of
Stokes, as well as of Gibbons et al., is that they expose the inadequacy
of this well-nigh causal logic. In reality, applied research is just as
likely to elicit fundamental questions as basic research is likely to motivate the development of applications. At best,
Basic
Applied
the standard model would have to operate in two
directions.
Basic research therefore does not constitute the foundation on
which the edifice of science is built, but it is simply one form of scientific practice – a very respectable form, to be sure, but it is unwise to justify substantial government investment in this type of research solely on
the grounds of its potential longer-term benefits for technological and
economic development (which it unmistakably has). It stands here in
competition with other types of research, and it might even risk losing
out in the long run. No, the justification for subsidising basic research
should also be founded on an appreciation of the never-diminishing
need of human beings to ask fundamental questions – driven by curiosity, by a hunger to know. This quest for fundamental understanding is, as it were, indelibly programmed into the human species.
To be always seeking after the useful does not become free and exalted
souls,
wrote Aristotle as early as 350 bc.6 This maxim would better become
the mission statements of the research institutions cited above than the
implicit references they currently make to the economic profitability of
the research efforts in fields of basic research.
Back to Stokes. His criticism is directed chiefly at the second
characteristic of the standard model – its unidimensionality. The standard model leaves no choice: research must be positioned somewhere
on a one-dimensional line running from pure ‘basic research’ to fully
6. Aristotle, Politics (1963), Book viii, 1338 b3.

97

Artistic Research within the Fields of Science

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 98

‘applied research’. Every study must be located at a single point somewhere along that line. Research that pretends to contribute both to fundamental understanding and to the development of applications is neither fish nor flesh in this model, since it is positioned near the middle
of the line and is consequently less ‘basic’ and less ‘applied’ than the
ideal cases at the two extremes. Stokes, in contrast, has good reasons to
assume that much, if not most, scientific research is not classifiable as
either basic or applied research, and that particularly those studies that
seek to substantially contribute to societal development can often also
be labelled as basic research. In his analysis, Stokes (1997: 71-72) cites
the impressive work of Louis Pasteur in the field of microbiology as a
perfect synthesis of the aims of ‘understanding’ and ‘use’. Pasteur strove
to achieve a fundamental understanding of the bacteriological processes
he studied, but he was equally interested in controlling the effects of
those processes in humans and animals. The unidimensional model, for
its part, forces Pasteur’s research into a murky middle ground.
Against this linear model, Stokes posits a two-dimensional conceptual plane that does justice to research inspired both by the quest
for fundamental understanding and by considerations of practical use
and application.

Quadrant model of scientific research
Stokes (1997: 73)
Research is inspired by:
Considerations of use?
No

Yes

Yes

Pure basic
research

Use-inspired
basic research

No

Pure applied
research

Quest for
fundamental
understanding?

98

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 99

The work of the theoretical physicist Niels Bohr typifies the upper-left
quadrant: pure, basic research carried out with no practical aim, even
though many applications were potentially there. On the lower right
is the quadrant of pure applied research, exemplified by the work of
Thomas Edison, who, as Stokes observes, restrained his employees from
investigating the deeper scientific implications of the findings they
made in their pursuit of commercially profitable electrical light. In Pasteur’s quadrant, we find research that both seeks to expand the frontiers
of understanding and draws inspiration from practical considerations.
In addition to Pasteur and others, Stokes cites here research by John
Maynard Keynes and by the Manhattan Project.
The fourth quadrant is not empty, but is occupied, according to
Stokes, by ‘research that systematically explores particular phenomena
without having in view either general explanatory objectives or any applied use to which the results will be put, a conception more at home
with the broader German idea of Wissenschaft than it is with French or
Anglo-American ideas of science’ (Stokes 1997: 74, italics in original).
This is the quadrant (if we may interpret Stokes in this way) of disciplines such as art history, which, in their focus on specific phenomena,
are not primarily searching for the fundamental understandings referred
to here, nor are they seeking any kind of practical application. Obviously this is a simplification. After all, interpretation, for example, often plays a significant role in describing artworks, while the results of
the research can also be put to use for mediating purposes in the art
world. Stokes himself cites Peterson’s Guide to the
The irony will escape no one.
Birds of North America, which systematically de- By suggesting a connection here
scribes the characteristics and distribution of bird between art history and the
species, as an example of a worthy endeavour writing of a bird guide, I show
that I fell into the same trap in
that neither pursues fundamental understanding preparing this chapter that I
nor envisages any direct application.
have criticised others for: unnecNow what help does this conceptual essarily and unproductively distancing oneself from people that
framework give us in understanding and posi- could actually be allies.
tioning artistic research in the broad realm of research and development? Unlike Gibbons and
his colleagues, Stokes devotes virtually no attention to the field of humanities, let alone discussing an often small-scale activity like artistic

99

Artistic Research within the Fields of Science

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 100

research. This does not, however, relieve us of the task of investigating
what significance his model could have for the type of research we are
studying here. Although artistic research, as we have seen, operates on
many of its fronts at a considerable distance from the practices and
mores of ‘science’, the quadrant model can be interpreted in ways that
can shed light on that synthesis of creative design, performative engagement, affective reflexivity, and talent development which is so
unique to the artistic quest. In artistic research, art practices are deployed methodologically in the research process, and in part they are
also outcomes of the research themselves. The research seeks both to
broaden our understanding of the world and of ourselves as well as to
enrich that world by experimentally developing new artefacts: compositions, designs, choreographies, images, art installations. Artistic research is (to borrow Stokes’s words) motivated both by a ‘quest for fundamental understanding’ and by ‘considerations of use’. It therefore
belongs to Pasteur’s quadrant.
In the Critique of Judgement, Immanuel Kant drew a distinction
between pure aesthetic judgment and the judgment of art. Art judgment surpasses aesthetic judgment, because it focuses on the cultural
value of artworks as well as on their beauty. That cultural value lies in
their capacity to ‘leave [something] over for reflection’ and to ‘dispose
[...] the spirit to Ideas.’7 Although these principally undefined, but fundamental, ‘ideas’ are a different type of insights to the scientific explanations or interpretations obtained through ‘basic research’, they are no
less fundamental. That is because, as we experience art, we articulate
what it means to have any experiences, knowledge, and understanding
at all (to remain in the transcendental spirit of Kant). This is the reflexive nature of art; this is the engagement which is immanent in aesthetic distance. Hence, in addition to producing artefacts in the form
of artworks and artistic practices, artistic research also generates fundamental ideas and understandings which, although non-discursive as
a rule, make the world into what it is or could be. Here lies the performative and critical power of research in the arts.
7. Kant (1978 [1790/93]: §53, §52) alludes to a quality of artworks which ‘etwas zum
nachdenken übrigbleiben läßt’, ‘den Geist zu Ideen stimmt’.

100

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 101

‘… excluding artistic “research” of any kind’?
Officials at the oecd headquarters in Paris have recently held out the
prospect of a new edition of the distribution list from which the phrase
‘excluding artistic “research” of any kind’ will be
The Revised Field of Science and
scrapped. The Humanities classification will then Technology (fos) Classification in
be as follows: History and Archaeology; Lan- the Frascati Manual has meanguages and Literature; Philosophy; Ethics and while been published on the
website of the oecd.
Religion; Art; and Other Humanities. What
‘other humanities’ is meant to include has not
been specified. The Art section will then read:
Art (arts, history of arts, performing arts, music)
• Arts, Art History; Architectural Design; Performing Arts
Studies (Musicology, Theatre Science, Dramaturgy); Folklore
Studies
• Studies on Film, Radio and Television
A Dutch government spokesperson who took part in the revision explained that ‘this must involve activities of a research nature – therefore not the specific subdivisions of the arts themselves, but the activities that study them’.8
This explanation is only of limited help to us, and the classification remains peculiar. Nonetheless, it is definitely meaningful to distinguish between art practice per se and artistic research – assuming,
at least, that not all art is also research, as some people claim.9 In the
foregoing text I have mainly used the term artistic research to denote that
domain of research and development in which the practice of art – that
is, the making and the playing, the creation and the performance, and
the works of art that result – play a constitutive role in a methodological sense. This type of research is also described as ‘research in and
through artistic practice’, ‘art research’, or ‘practice-based’ or ‘practiceled’ research in the creative and performing arts. I have opted for the
term ‘artistic research’ here because that succinctly, and rather provoca8. E-mail correspondence, 20 October 2006 (my translation from Dutch).
9. See chapter 2 for a discussion of this distinction.

101

Artistic Research within the Fields of Science

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 102

tively, claims a place for this endeavour in the world of research and development (as laid down in the Frascati Manual) – and also, of course,
as a tongue-in-cheek reference to the oecd distribution list.
But let us come back to the issue at stake. What is artistic research
all about? It is about cutting-edge developments in the discipline that
we may broadly refer to as ‘art’. It is about the development of talent
and expertise in that area. It is about articulating knowledge and understandings as embodied in artworks and creative processes. It is
about searching, exploring, and mobilising – sometimes drifting, sometimes driven – in the artistic domain. It is about creating new images,
narratives, sound worlds, experiences. It is about broadening and shifting our perspectives, our horizons. It is about constituting and accessing uncharted territories. It is about organised curiosity, about reflexivity and engagement. It is about connecting knowledge, morality,
beauty, and everyday life in making and playing, creating and performing. It is about ‘disposing the spirit to Ideas’ through artistic practices and products. This is what we mean when we use the term ‘artistic research’.

102

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 103

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 104

Chapter 5

Where Are
We Today?
The State of the
Art in Artistic
Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 105

Künstlerische Grundlagenforschung jenseits marktorientierter Kunstproduktion
ist die Basis für die Zukunft
der “Kulturnation Österreich”.*

* From ‘Money (f )or the Arts’, an initiative by the rectors of the Austrian universities of
the arts (see money 2007). ‘Fundamental artistic research, beyond market-oriented art
production, is the basis for Austria’s future as a “cultural nation”’ (my translation).

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:09 Pagina 106

Context
It is now time for a brief stopover. I began my explorations in 2004 and will finish them in 2012 (for the
time being). In 2008-2009, I was asked to summarise
the current situation in artistic research in Reykjavík
(October 2008), Vienna (December 2008), Copenhagen
(February 2009), Saltsjöbaden near Stockholm (March
2009), and Berlin (June 2009). This chapter can hence
be regarded as a further elaboration of chapter 2, in
which I broadly outlined the debate on research in the
arts. Many topics discussed in previous chapters are
summarised, reformulated or expanded on here. The
present chapter is also a snapshot in time. But since
some time had elapsed between my presentations and
their eventual publication in Sweden (2010) and Austria
(2011), I have chosen the Austrian publication for inclusion here. This is not only because it contains the most
recent information, but also because it describes an interesting initiative by the Austrian Science Fund (fwf).
I saw less need for annotations in the present text.

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 107

Artistic research is a challenging but controversial subject. There are different views on what this type of research encompasses. Some people
even doubt whether any such thing as ‘artistic research’ exists at all.
Some people, both in academia and in the art world, oppose the very
phenomenon of artistic research. Yet at the same time, artistic research
is gaining recognition and support – in the academic world, in the art
world, and also from government bodies that are supporting this new
field of research with legislation and funding.
The controversies surrounding artistic research often turn on the
problem of demarcation. What exactly distinguishes artistic research
from art practice? And what distinguishes it from scientific or academic
research? Underlying such demarcation problems
The emergence of artistic reis a question of legitimacy. Do practice-based research could be an excellent
search degrees, and especially a PhD in the arts,
subject for a case study that
would analyse, from a Haberhave a place? Who needs them? Which institumasian point of view, how the
tions should be vested with degree awarding
political and economic subsyspower? And does artistic research, like all other retems penetrate into this still
vulnerable field of research with
search, deserve long-term funding? When it
their power and money mechacomes down to it, it all appears a question of
nisms, and thus threaten to
corrupt it.
power and money, as so often is the case. This
constantly threatens to corrupt the debate on the
substance of artistic research.
Some people think the battle is already over, that victories have
been won, and that the time has now come to leave the debate on foundations behind us and get back to business. After all, there is still much
work to be done to further establish the new field of research – infrastructural and institutional work, but also other work like building a
corpus of best practices. Yet the debate on artistic research is still not
over. Many people, both inside and outside academia, are still asking
what artistic research really is, what place it deserves, and what significance it has. In fact, the subtitle of this essay might just as well have
been ‘The Issue of Artistic Research’.
In the pages below, I shall (1) describe artistic research as an
emerging paradigm, against a backdrop of trends (2) in higher education and (3) in artistic practice. I will (4) say something about the place
of artistic research in the science system and (5) pose the question of

107

Where Are We Today? The State of the Art in Artistic Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 108

whether artistic research can indeed be considered academic research.
I will then discuss some (6) epistemological and (7) methodological issues, and will (8) identify three aspects of artistic research that I view
as characteristic. I will conclude with (9) some comments on the place
of artistic research in the training of artists. I must limit myself here to
a schematic description of artistic research. All these topics deserve to
be treated in far more detail. My sketch of where we now stand in artistic research should provide a broad overall view, but not a comprehensive one.
Here and there in the text I shall refer to the situation in Austria, and in particular to the new Programme for Arts-Based Research
(Programm zur Entwicklung und Erschließung der Künste, or peek)
recently launched by the Austrian Science Fund (fwf).1 In creating this
programme, Austria has taken a step that deserves to be followed in continental Europe.
Before beginning my sketch, I would like to comment on the
term artistic research. A variety of expressions exist to denote this form
of research, but artistic research is now the most widely used. German
speakers increasingly refer to künstlerische Forschung. In francophone
Canada, the term recherche-création is in frequent use. In the world of
architecture and product design, the expression research by design is common. Brad Haseman in Australia has proposed using performative research to distinguish the new paradigm from other qualitative research
paradigms. In the United Kingdom, the terms practice-based research,
and increasingly practice-led research, are often used, in particular by
funding agencies like the Arts and Humanities Research Council.
Sometimes the term practice as research is used to indicate the central
place that artistic practice occupies in the research. The expression research in and through art practice is also used by some in order to distinguish this type of research from research into or for art practice.
What all these expressions have in common is the word research. Yet that does not go without saying. Research in the emphatic
sense is an activity traditionally associated with what people do in universities and industrial laboratories, and not with what people do as they
1. See peek 2009.

108

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 109

practise or teach art. In my country, the Dutch Advisory Council for
Science and Technology Policy recently recommended using ‘design and
development’ (ontwerp en ontwikkeling) to denote those research-like
activities that take place in professional schools, including the schools
of the arts; within higher education, the term ‘research’ (onderzoek) was
to be restricted to universities. Reality has since overtaken this recommendation, however, and ‘applied research’ is now defined as one of the
remits of higher professional education in the Netherlands, and is
even recognised as such by law.2 This illustration of the reluctance to
use the word research does not stand alone. In Norway, the Artistic Research Fellowship Programme has been operating since 2003. That is
its English name, at least, but in their own language Norwegians avoid
the term forskning and speak instead of kunstnerisk utviklingsarbeid
(‘artistic development work’). And in Austria, the term arts-based research is used in English to denote the new funding programme,
whereas the German name is Entwicklung und Erschließung der Künste
(‘development and promotion of the arts’).
To be sure, differences do exist in what words such as research,
recherche, Forschung, or onderzoek normally denote and connote in English, French, German, or Dutch. By analogy, there are also considerable
differences between what is meant by the English science and the German Wissenschaft, which also includes the humanities (Geisteswissenschaften). In the foundational struggle that is
One aim of this book is to argue
raging over artistic research, the uses and the for a broader notion of ‘research’
meanings of words are of cardinal importance. As and an enhanced notion of
paradigms shift, not only do changes occur in the ‘academia’ (cf. my annotation in
chapter 2, page 44).
way of looking at things, but also in the meanings
of words. And who owns the language, anyway?
In the background of this semantic controversy, science policy continues to be informed by a rather obsolete model of what ‘research and
development’ is. The classical notion, as laid down in sources such as the
2. This decision recently received support when the Conference of European Ministers
Responsible for Higher Education issued an appeal known as the Leuven Communiqué
(see leuven 2009) in April 2009 to further strengthen the knowledge and research
functions in European higher professional education.

109

Where Are We Today? The State of the Art in Artistic Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 110

Frascati Manual, draws a distinction between ‘basic research’, ‘applied research’, and ‘experimental development’. In the eyes of some, artistic research would have more to do with the experimental development of artefacts (works of art) than with research in the emphatic sense. This is a
misunderstanding. Although artistic research certainly seeks to enrich our
world with new artworks and new artistic practices, it additionally seeks
to gain a fundamental understanding of our world and ourselves as embodied in those artworks and practices. Or, as the peek formulates it, ‘Artsbased research should be understood as basic aesthetic research, involving knowledge acquisition and method development through artistic and
aesthetic processes as opposed to purely scientific ones.’3

Artistic research as emerging paradigm
A portrayal of artistic research from within as a new field of research,
as an ascendant paradigm, would need to describe the types of objects
or topics at which the research is directed, the sorts of questions asked,
the types of methods applied, and the kinds of knowledge it generates.
I have chosen here to describe the paradigm from outside. I therefore
employ ‘paradigm’ in a loose sense, rather than in the strictly Kuhnian
sense as used in the philosophy of science. As I intend to use ‘paradigm’,
it denotes a conceptual and institutional framework that embodies its
own practices, vocabularies, and theories. Such a framework gains a stable status once it is underpinned by the following elements: (1) institutions and organisations that support the paradigm and afford it legitimacy; (2) publications in books and journals which explicate the
paradigm’s basic principles and provide access to the research findings;
(3) conferences in which cutting-edge developments within the paradigm are presented and discussed; (4) government bodies and funding
agencies that support the paradigm through both formal and material
means; (5) institutions of higher education which pass on the paradigm
and initiate newcomers into it.
3. peek 2009: 3 (my translation). The German: ‘Arts-based Research ist als ästhetische
Grundlagenforschung zu verstehen und meint damit den Erkenntnisgewinn und die
Methodenentwicklung mittels ästhetischer und künstlerischer im Unterschied zu rein
wissenschaftlichen Erkenntnisprozessen.’

110

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 111

1. In numerous countries, organisations have been founded (or sections
set up within existing organisations) that are dedicated to artistic research.
Within higher education, artistic research is now gaining a foothold
within schools of the arts as well as in post-academic institutes. Arts institutions and events outside the education system, such as museums,
dance companies, and biennales, are also giving increasing attention to
artistic research. European network organisations like the European
League of Institutes of the Arts (elia) and the European Association of
Conservatoires (aec) have strands and projects devoted to artistic research.
2. A growing number of journals are publishing on artistic research.
Some are specifically dedicated to this field of research, especially in visual arts and design. At this writing, a journal on practice-based research
in music is being founded, and plans also exist for
This text was written in August
an international Journal for Artistic Research. More 2009, when the preparations to
and more books (readers, monographs, text- set up jar were in full swing.
books) are appearing on the market which deal See chapter 11 for an eyewitness
account.
with methodological and epistemological aspects
of the research field. A voluminous collection of
articles entitled The Routledge Companion to Research in the Arts will be
published in October 2010 (see box for a list of recent books).
Books on artistic research (2004 – 2011)
• Carole Gray and Julian Malins, Visualizing Research: A Guide
to the Research Process in Art and Design (Aldershot: Ashgate,
2004)
• Paul Carter, Material Thinking (Melbourne: Melbourne University Press, 2004)
• Graeme Sullivan, Art Practice as Research: Inquiry into the Visual Arts (London: Sage, 2005)
• Mika Hannula, Juha Suoranta, and Tere Vadén, Artistic Research: Theories, Methods, Practices (Helsinki: Academy of
Fine Arts; Gothenburg: University of Gothenburg, 2005)
• Katy Macleod and Lin Holdridge (eds), Thinking through Art:
Reflections on Art as Research (London: Routledge, 2006)
• Pierre Gosselin and Éric le Coguiec (eds), La Recherche créa-

111

Where Are We Today? The State of the Art in Artistic Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 112

•
•

•
•

•
•
•
•

•

•

•
•

112

tion: Pour une compréhension de la recherche en pratique artistique (Québec: Presses de l’Université du Québec, 2006)
Estelle Barrett and Barbara Bolt (eds), Practice as Research: Approaches to Creative Arts Enquiry (London: I.B. Tauris, 2007)
Sabine Gehm, Pirkko Husemann, and Katharina von Wilcke
(eds), Wissen in Bewegung: Perspektiven der künstlerischen und
wissenschaftlichen Forschung im Tanz (Bielefeld: Transcript,
2007)
Dieter Mersch and Michaela Ott (eds), Kunst und Wissenschaft
(Munich: Wilhelm Fink, 2007)
Shannon Rose Riley and Lynette Hunter (eds), Mapping
Landscapes for Performance as Research (Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan, 2009)
Ludivine Allegue and others (eds), Practice-as-Research in Performance and Screen, (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009)
James Elkins (ed.), Artists with PhDs: On the New Doctoral Degree in Studio Art (Washington dc: New Academia, 2009)
Elke Bippus (ed.), Kunst des Forschens: Praxis eines ästhetischen
Denkens (Zurich: Diaphanes, 2009)
Anton Rey und Stefan Schöbi (eds), Künstlerische Forschung:
Positionen und Perspektiven (Zurich: Institute for the Performing Arts and Film, Zurich University of the Arts, 2009)
Corina Caduff, Fiona Siegenthaler, and Tan Wälchli (eds),
Kunst und künstlerische Forschung: Musik, Kunst, Design, Literatur, Tanz, Jahrbuch Zürcher Hochschule der Künste, 6.
Also in English within same volume: Art and Artistic Research:
Music, Visual Art, Design, Literature, Dance, Zurich Yearbook of the Arts, 6 (Zurich: Scheidegger und Spiess, 2009)
Kathleen Coessens, Anne Douglas, and Darla Crispin, The
Artistic Turn: A Manifesto, Orpheus Research Centre in Music Series, 1 (Leuven: Leuven University Press, 2009)
Michael Biggs and Henrik Karlsson (eds), The Routledge
Companion to Research in the Arts (London: Routledge, 2011)
Janet Ritterman, Gerald Bast, and Jürgen Mittelstraß (eds),
Kunst und Forschung: Können Künstler Forscher sein? (Vienna:
Springer, 2011)

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 113

• Florian Dombois and others (eds), Intellectual Birdhouse:
Artistic Practice as Research (London: Koenig Books, 2011)
• Janneke Wesseling (ed.), See It Again, Say It Again: The Artist
as Researcher (Amsterdam: Valiz, 2011)
• Martin Tröndle and Julia Warmers (eds), Kunstforschung als ästhetische Wissenschaft: Beiträge zur transdisziplinären Hybridisierung von Wissenschaft und Kunst (Bielefeld: Transcript, 2011)
3. Conferences and symposia that focus on artistic research now constitute an international forum for the presentation and discussion of the
latest developments and viewpoints. Often such gatherings have unusual formats that do justice to the specific nature of research in the arts.
As well as the classical keynote addresses and paper presentations, they
offer many workshops and demonstrations with hands-on opportunities to learn from one another. The proceedings of these meetings form
a growing corpus of texts that further the debate on artistic research.
At the same time, participants seek alternative forms of presentation,
documentation, and dissemination that are more compatible with the
practice of artistic research. The box below gives an (incomplete) list
of such conferences held between October 2008 and June 2009.
Conferences on artistic research (October 2008 to June 2009)
• Sensuous Knowledge 5: ‘Questioning Qualities’. Bergen, 2426 October 2008
• Research into Practice 5: ‘Interpretation in Research in the Visual and Performing Arts’. London, 31 October 2008
• elia Biennial Conference: ‘Talkin’ Loud and Saying Something? Four Perspectives on Artistic Research’. Gothenburg,
29 October-2 November 2008
• Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (nwo): ‘PhD
in de kunsten’ (PhD in the Arts). The Hague, 21 November 2008
• Austrian Science Board (öwr): ‘Kunst und Forschung’ (Art
and Research). Vienna, 4 December 2008
• Association of Nordic Music Academies (anma), Annual
Meeting 2009: ‘Research and Artistic Work’. Copenhagen, 5
February 2009

113

Where Are We Today? The State of the Art in Artistic Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 114

• Swedish Research Council (Vetenskapsrådet): ‘Konstnärlig
forskning inför framtiden’ (Artistic Research in the Future).
Stockholm, 12-13 March 2009
• Zürcher Hochschule der Künste (Zurich University of the
Arts, zhdk): ‘The Difference of Art and Art Research across
the Disciplines’. Zurich, 23-24 April 2009
• Die Junge Akademie (The Young Academy): ‘Salon Kunst
und Wissenschaft’. Berlin, 20 June 2009
4. The national science and research councils and funding agencies are increasingly amenable to artistic research, supporting it both substantively
(by formulating standards and quality criteria) and materially (by providing funding). The box below lists reports and programmes that give
an impression of developments in various European countries. Some of
the financial support is ongoing, lump-sum funding to universities of the
arts; some is channelled through national programmes that issue grants
on a competitive basis. The support may focus on projects initiated inside or outside the schools of the arts, on research by staff members, on
PhD studentships in the arts, or on fellowship programmes for artists. In
some countries, the accent is on collaboration between the arts and sciences, and in others between the arts and ‘industry’ (particularly the
smaller- and middle-scale enterprises in the cultural sector).
Artistic research in international perspective: State of the art 2010
• In the United Kingdom, ongoing funding has been provided since the early 1990s for staff research in arts education
institutions. The Arts and Humanities Research Council also
provides grants for ‘practice-led’ doctoral research, and there
is a special Research Fellowship programme for artists.
• Universities and art schools in Belgium work together in partnerships known as Associations, which give funding and
support for research in the arts and for doctoral research by
artists. From 2010, the National Fund for Scientific Research
(nfwo/fnrs) will have a specialised committee known as
Cult2 to assess applications involving artistic research.
• In Austria, the Fonds zur Förderung der wissenschaftlichen

114

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 115

•

•

•

•

•

115

Forschung (Austrian Science Fund, fwf) has recently launched
the Programm zur Entwicklung und Erschließung der Künste
(Programme for Arts-Based Research, peek) to support artistic research. In May 2009, the Wissenschaftsrat (Austrian Science Board) issued the report Empfehlung zur Entwicklung der
Kunstuniversitäten in Österreich (Recommendations for the Development of Art Universities in Austria), which included proposals for promoting research in the art universities.
In March 2009, the Rektorenkonferenz der Fachhochschulen
der Schweiz (Rectors’ Conference of the Swiss Universities of
Applied Sciences, kfh) published the report Forschung an
Schweizer Kunsthochschulen (Research at Swiss Universities of
the Arts) which urges the promotion of ‘künstlerische Forschung’
(artistic research) and the development of third-cycle (doctoral-level) programmes.
German federal states are working at varying paces to develop
doctoral programmes in the arts. One of the first initiatives was
the Promotionsstudiengang Kunst und Design (Doctoral Programme in Art and Design) at the Bauhaus-Universität Weimar.
In November 2008, the Universität der Künste Berlin (Berlin
University of the Arts) launched a third-cycle programme in the
form of a Graduiertenschule (Graduate School).
From January 2010, a new law in Sweden permits establishment of doctoral programmes in higher arts education. The
Swedish Research Council has decided to fund a national
school for artistic research, administered by Lund University.
The Swedish National Agency for Higher Education will decide which universities and/or university colleges will be entitled to confer doctoral degrees.
In Norway, an Artistic Research Fellowship Programme has
been operating since 2003. It enables
The German Research Foundaartists, in affiliation with one of the tion (dfg) is to organise a workhigher arts schools, to do full-time re- shop on artistic research on 4-5
search for three years which is recog- May 2012 in the Haus der Kulturen der Welt in Berlin. One
nised as equivalent to doctoral study.
purpose is to consider creating
The Academy of Finland published an facilities for artistic research.

Where Are We Today? The State of the Art in Artistic Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 116

English report in March 2009 entitled Research in Art and
Design in Finnish Universities, setting out strategies for the
future that might be of interest elsewhere in Europe.
5. Artistic research has made its entry into European higher education
in the arts. The pace of the initiatives, as well as the emphases laid, may
vary from country to country. One important theme is the introduction of a third cycle in arts education, which sometimes takes the form
of a doctoral degree course and sometimes of a fellowship programme.
At the end of this essay I will return to the status of artistic research in
arts education.

Artistic research and higher education policy
If you talk about higher education policy in Europe today, you talk
about Bologna (or Dublin, Berlin, Lisbon, Leuven). That reflects the
goal of forty-six European nations to create a European Higher Education Area (ehea) by 2010. This homogeneity of higher education systems is intended to improve transparency in education. It facilitates comparison of programmes, degrees, and diplomas. It promotes mobility of
students and staff, as well as other forms of international exchange and
cooperation. The higher education reforms have varying consequences
for the countries adopting the Bologna process, and they are also proceeding at different speeds. For some countries, this development signifies a farewell, or at least drastic adaptations, to the binary system that
here and there stubbornly divides the world into thinkers and doers.
The Bologna process also entails the full introduction of an education framework common in English-speaking countries, which
consists of three cycles: bachelors, masters, and doctorate. In particular for professionally or practically oriented schools of higher education,
this is a major shift. It is a step that has long been taken in the UK,
where the former polytechnics were promoted to university status in
1992. Arts education has followed this trend in many countries.
With the introduction of the three-cycle structure, research has
also made its entry into those realms of higher education that previously
had little or no experience with research. These include arts education.
The question now arises as to whether Bologna is a dictate and threat

116

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 117

targeted at arts education from outside, or whether it represents an opportunity and challenge for the arts schools. My appraisal is that the
entry of research into higher arts education could help create a free space
for artistic research, for what Paul Carter has called ‘material thinking’.
But first the arts education sector has to articulate what it understands
by artistic research.

Artistic research and art practice
Research today seems like a craze. It provokes quite some scepticism here
and there in the art world. How can this ‘academisation’ (as some disdainfully call it) be in the interest of artistic practice? Won’t this ‘academic drift’ lead slowly but surely to some new kind of ‘academism’, to
an art form and an art discourse that are isolated from the art in the ‘real
world’ (even if they mean something within academia)? That danger
should not be played down. Especially since the historical avant-garde,
there is a justifiable reticence amongst artists, and within the broader art
world, towards every form of academism. And indeed, artistic research
deserves to be banned forthwith if it heads in that direction, if it is no
longer propelled by developments within artistic practice itself.
The artists of today are what Donald Schön has called ‘reflective
practitioners’. The current dynamic in the art world demands that
artists be able to contextualise their work, and to position themselves
vis-à-vis others in the art world, vis-à-vis current trends and developments in artistic practice, vis-à-vis grant providers and the general
public. This outside perspective complements the view from inside. A
naïve conception of art, of artworks, art production, and art reception,
is a thing of the past. We have left behind us any pre-critical conception of art, such as persisted even within modernism. Art (and not just
conceptual art) is highly reflexive, even though pre-reflective (tacit) aspects also figure in its production and reception. This reflexiveness of
art, in conjunction with the reflexive stance of the artist, is one of the
most important rationales for research in the arts.
Artistic research is inseparably tied to the artistic development of
the artist as well as to the development of the discipline or disciplines
in which he or she works. Through artistic research, artists create room
for fundamental reflection – a free space to think – in and through their

117

Where Are We Today? The State of the Art in Artistic Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 118

practice of creating and performing. In the art world, in artistic practice, there is a real need for this free space for material thinking. Both
the pressure of the art market and the strains of art production leave
artists little room to ‘stop and contemplate’ what they are doing. Many
artists must operate as free enterprisers in the market of the ‘creative industry’, a market that is not oriented to reflection, but which expects
its suppliers to deliver a constant stream of new products and projects.
Introducing artistic research into higher arts education would mean creating room, within this haven at least, where artists and trainees can grow
and thereby contribute to the development of the arts. Or, as a pamphlet
jointly published by the rectors of the Austrian art universities has recently put it: ‘Fundamental artistic research, beyond market-oriented art
production, is the basis for Austria’s future as a “cultural nation”.’4
The art world therefore needs artistic reA book with a subtitle such as
search with a certain sense of urgency. But there
‘Perspectives on Artistic Reis also a tension between artistic practice and acsearch and the Art World’ could
take this impact as its primary
ademia, between the relatively autonomous art
focus. Just as academia is not a
world, with its distinctive culture and dynamic,
stable system, but one that is
continually evolving, the art
and the world of research, of reflection. That
world and the things we undertension need not be unproductive. Interesting
stand by ‘art’ are also in a conthings can happen when those two worlds meet.
stant state of transformation.
The present book focuses on
The advent of artistic research will have its imthe transformation of academia.
pact on academia, on the self-understanding of
arts academies and universities, and on our understanding of what academic research is. And there will likewise be
an impact on artistic practice, on our conceptions of art creation and
of what art is.

Artistic research within the science system
The world of science and technology, of research and development, can
be categorised in various ways. As we have seen, the classical subdivision
between basic research, applied research, and experimental development
is no longer appropriate in the light of the present diversity of academic
fields, research strategies, and knowledge forms. Various suggestions have
4. See money 2007.

118

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 119

been made for different ways of looking at science and knowledge production. One proposal highlights the emergence and importance of
‘Mode 2 knowledge production’. In contrast to the more traditional research in university disciplines, Mode 2 production involves interdisciplinary or transdisciplinary research in the context of application (see
Gibbons et al. 1994). It also implies the substantive and organisational
involvement not just of academics, but of other stakeholders as well, who
help plan the research and evaluate its societal relevance.
Because of its close ties with art practice and the central role that
that practice plays in the research, it sometimes seems as if artistic research is a type of Mode 2 knowledge production. Indeed, some forms
of artistic research, such as research in architecture or product design,
can be considered Mode 2 production. But other forms, like research
on historical performance practice in music or research in and through
choreographic practices, might more readily be seen as intradisciplinary
basic research intended to contribute both materially and cognitively
to the development of the art form in question.
As noted, much artistic research focuses simultaneously on enriching our world by developing new products (like compositions, images, performances, installations) and on broadening our understanding of reality and of ourselves – an understanding that is
embodied in the products generated by the research. This dual research
aim likewise transcends the classic dichotomy of applied versus basic
research. Stokes’s (1997) quadrant model provides a conceptual framework for understanding this type of research. In Stokes’s analysis,
much valuable research, today and in the past, embraces both these
aims: achieving a fundamental understanding of what is being studied, as well as developing products and services that benefit society.
This multidimensional model of the science system enables us to understand that unique intertwinement of ‘development and promotion
of the arts’ (Entwicklung und Erschließung der Künste) and ‘basic aesthetic research’ (ästhetische Grundlagenforschung) that is characteristic
of artistic research. The new Austrian Programme for Arts-Based Research (peek) allows for both: ‘Typical artistic “products” such as
concerts, performances, exhibitions, or compositions may certainly
serve as an aesthetic laboratory or a proof-of-concept within a peek

119

Where Are We Today? The State of the Art in Artistic Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 120

arts-based research project.’5 And, as noted above: ‘Arts-based research
should be understood as basic aesthetic research, involving knowledge
acquisition and method development through artistic and aesthetic
processes as opposed to purely scientific ones.’6

Artistic research as academic research
Can artistic research be understood as a form of academic research? Such
a question presumes that a stable concept exists of what academic research
is. By and large, there is rough agreement within academia about what
is understood by academic research. But as has more often been the case
in history, such understandings are subject to change as new research traditions arrive on the scene that offer an enhancement or adjustment to
what has been passed down. It is quite conceivable that the introduction
of artistic research into academia will influence our understanding of academic research, and even our understanding of what academia is.
Academic research is characterised by an ‘original investigation in
order to gain knowledge and understanding’ (rae 2005: 34). Thus begins
the definition employed by the former Research Assessment Exercise in
the UK. Such research is guided by well-articulated questions, problems,
or topics which are relevant in the research context – which in our case
includes both art practice and the academic discourse on the arts. The research employs methods that are appropriate to the research and which
assure the validity and reliability of the research results. The findings are
presented, documented, and disseminated in appropriate ways. This is the
way that every academic research study answers the questions: What is
being studied? Why is it being studied? How is it studied? In what form
are the results presented? If artistic research is described in this way, there
is not yet any reason to exclude it, even though its object, context,
method, and knowledge production may be unconventional.
The emergence of artistic research runs parallel to what might be
called the liberalisation of research in academia. One witness to this lib5. peek 2009: 3 (my translation). The German: ‘Typische Kunst-“Produkte” wie
Konzerte, Aufführungen, Ausstellungen oder Kompositionen [können] im Sinne eines
ästhetischen Labors oder eines Demonstrators des proof-of-concept sehr wohl Teil eines
peek-Projekts sein.’
6. See note 3.

120

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 121

eralisation is the definition given in the European Higher Education Area
standards known as the Dublin Descriptors (jqi 2004: 3), which set out
the intended learning outcomes of the first, second, and third cycles:
The word [research] is used in an inclusive way to accommodate
the range of activities that support original and innovative work
in the whole range of academic, professional and technological
fields, including the humanities, and traditional, performing, and
other creative arts. It is not used in any limited or restricted sense,
or relating solely to a traditional ‘scientific method’.
In the case of artistic research, it is important to stress that the object
of research, the context of the research, the method of research, and
the way the research results are presented and documented are inextricably bound up with the practice of making and playing. Indeed,
artistic practice is central to the research itself. The subject of research
is the artist’s creative or performative practice. The study is relevant
in the context of artistic practice, the art world. The research takes
place in and through the artist’s creative and performative actions, and
the research findings are, in part, artistic products and practices. The
peek programme description also recognises this quality as an important distinction between artistic research and the more traditional academic research on the arts. ‘Arts-based research differs fundamentally from academic disciplines like literary studies, art history,
and musicology.’7
Artistic research thus occupies a place of its own in the world of
academic research. The Austrian Science Fund has an extensive classification scheme listing different types of academic art studies, from
Angewandte Kunst (applied arts) to Theaterwissenschaft (theatre studies)
to Produktgestaltung (product design) to Jazzforschung (jazz research) –
a total of twenty-seven disciplines. At the very least, Künstlerische
Forschung (artistic research) deserves to be added to that list.
7. peek 2009: 3 (my translation). The German: ‘Entwicklung und Erschließung der
Künste unterscheidet sich prinzipiell von Wissenschaftsdisziplinen wie z.B.
Literaturwissenschaft, Kunstgeschichte und Musikologie.’

121

Where Are We Today? The State of the Art in Artistic Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 122

The epistemology of artistic research
If research is an original investigation undertaken to gain knowledge
and understanding, then in the case of artistic research we could add
the synonyms insight and comprehension, in order to emphasise that
a perceptive, receptive, and verstehende engagement with the subject
matter is often more important to the research than getting an ‘explanatory grip’. Such an investigation also seeks to enhance our experience – in the rich sense of the word ‘experience’: the knowledge
and skills accumulated through action and practice, plus apprehension through the senses.
In the history of epistemology, the distinction is made between knowing that something is the case – theoretical knowledge,
propositional knowledge, explicit knowledge, focal knowledge – and
knowing how to do something, to make something – practical knowledge, embodied knowledge, implicit knowledge, tacit knowledge.
Artistic research operates mainly in the latter sphere. This is not to say
that explicit, propositional knowledge plays no part in artistic research.
It generally does. Yet the accent lies on those forms of knowledge and
understanding that are embodied in artistic practices and products.
So artistic research could be described as first and foremost an
articulation of the non-propositional forms of knowledge and experience in and through the creation of art. The obvious question is what
‘articulation’ means here – and more specifically,
Another key to it lies possibly in
what the role of discursivity is, of language, of the
Adorno’s insight that thoughts
verbal. How can the research be understood and
and concepts assemble around
art in such a way that the artevaluated if language does not at least play a meworks themselves begin to
diating, explanatory role? One key to this quesspeak. This will return in chapter 7, pages 154 and 168 (and cf.
tion is intersubjectivity. In the domain of artistic
also my annotation in chapter 3,
research, as in other research domains, the last
page 69).
word is spoken in a peer-group assessment
process. As the peek programme description puts
it: ‘To qualify as arts-based research, the creative process and its reception have to be intersubjectively assessed, documented, and presented
in order to ensure lasting accessibility for discourse and for systematic
research.’8

122

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 123

The methodology of artistic research
Sometimes artistic research is closely related to humanities research, in
particular to that in art studies and cultural studies. These disciplines
may provide interpretive frameworks that can also figure in research in
and through artistic practice, such as hermeneutics, semiotics, critical
theory, or cultural analysis. Sometimes artistic research has much in
common with technological, applied research, particularly where the
research is aimed at improving materials and techniques or at designing new instruments or applications. And sometimes artistic research
has a strong affinity with social science research, and more particularly
with ethnographic research or action research – whereby, in both cases,
the subject and object of study are intertwined, and the researcher is
both a participant and an observer.
All these forms of investigation have their place in the emerging
tradition of artistic research, and it would seem logical to therefore argue for methodological pluralism. Artistic research does not have any
one distinct, exclusive methodology. But there is one qualifying condition: artistic research centres on the practice of making and playing.
Practising the arts (creating, designing, performing) is intrinsic to the
research process. And artworks and art practices are partly the material
outcomes of the research. That is what ‘material thinking’ means.

Three aspects of artistic research
The contiguities between artistic research and other research domains
are manifold. These open many opportunities for productive liaisons,
as can be widely observed in practice. Some artist-researchers orient
themselves to academic art studies, some to philosophical aesthetics.
Others feel affinities with cultural studies or performance studies, and
action research and ethnographic field research may also be integrated
with artistic research. Some take phenomenology or cognitive sciences
as a source of inspiration, and others focus on engineering and tech8. peek 2009: 3 (my translation). The German: ‘Der kreative Prozess und dessen Rezeption müssen jedoch intersubjektiv reflektiert, dokumentiert und präsentiert werden, um
im Sinne der Arts-based Research nachhaltig dem künstlerischen Diskurs und der wissenschaftlichen Forschung zur Verfügung zu stehen.’

123

Where Are We Today? The State of the Art in Artistic Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 124

What is meant here is ‘metaphysics ... after its fall’. I first
used this notion in my article
‘Solidarität mit Metaphysik
nach ihrem Sturz: Einige Bemerkungen anläßlich Albrecht
Wellmers Adorno-Lektüre’ (Solidarity with Metaphysics after
its Fall: Some Remarks with
Reference to Albrecht Wellmer’s
Reading of Adorno) (Borgdorff
1998b). I will say a little more
about this in the two chapters to
follow. Non-conceptualism, realism, and contingency are discussed at the end of chapter 7.

nology. In my view, research in and through artistic practice has three characteristic attributes,
which constitute the ‘metaphysics’ of artistic research: (1) Artistic research concerns and affects
the foundations of our perception, our understanding, and our relationship to the world and
other people. I would call this the realism of artistic research. (2) Artistic research is ‘material thinking’: the articulation of non-propositional knowledge and experience, embodied in artworks and
creative processes. This is the non-conceptualism of
artistic research. (3) Artistic research is not about
theory, but about thought. It is not primarily directed at ‘knowing that
…’ or ‘knowing how …’. It is directed more at a not-knowing, or a notyet-knowing. It creates room for that which is unthought, that which
is unexpected – the idea that all things could be different. This is the
contingency of artistic research.

Artistic research and the schools of the arts
A distinction needs to be made between research and research training.
Within the arts academies, the schools of the arts, this translates into
the difference between research by staff and research by students during their training. And within the latter it is important to distinguish
between the bachelors, masters, and doctoral levels. Clearly the bachelors curriculum will teach elementary research skills like argumentation, information, communication, and presentation (thinking, searching, writing, speaking). The masters and doctoral programmes can then
focus more directly on doing research. In 2001, an informative report
was published by the UK Council for Graduate Education (ukcge
2001) entitled Research Training in the Creative and Performing Arts and
Design. It makes lucid recommendations for building research training
programmes at arts schools. Suggestions involve the research environment, research seminars, programme content, admission procedures,
supervision of researchers and research projects, and assessment of the
research. This report could provide support and inspiration to those
who are currently working to introduce research into arts education.

124

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 125

As pointed out above, there are many variations in the ways artistic research is embedded into European higher education in the arts.
One issue involves whether arts education has university status or takes
place in professional schools – or more precisely, whether the institutions
in question have degree-awarding power, including the right to offer research training programmes at the PhD level. Another issue is whether
the institutions have the material capacities to create a research environment, whether their staff members have opportunities for research,
and whether there is adequate funding. In closing I shall highlight several examples that illustrate the variations that now exist in Europe.
In the UK, ongoing support is provided for both staff research
through the Higher Education Funding Councils and doctoral research through the Arts and Humanities Research Council (ahrc) and
other bodies. Every six years, a Research Assessment Exercise (rae) takes
place that forms the basis for allocating research funding to the institutions. Some organisations operate thematic programmes as well, including programmes which focus on research in the arts, such as the
ahrc’s recent Beyond Text programme.
At the Universität der Künste Berlin (Berlin University of the
Arts, UdK), a Graduiertenschule (Graduate School) was established in
November 2008 which offers a third-cycle programme. The awarding
of the doctorate, however, is reserved for the more traditional disciplines, such as art history or music education. Creative and performing artists are still not eligible for that degree, but receive a diploma on
completion of the postgraduate programme. Part of the focus in the
UdK is on collaboration between artists, academics, and scientists.
In the Netherlands, research chairs known as lectoraten have been
created since 2002. Before that, no research at all occurred at arts academies, conservatories, or theatre schools. Currently, thirty such research
chairs in the arts exist throughout the country – amounting to no more
than one professor per 650 students. In addition to research, the remits
of these professors include special emphases on innovation in arts education, strengthening ties with professional practice, and in-service research training for staff at the academies. A pilot project initiated by the
Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (nwo) for a limited
number of PhD studentships for visual artists was started in 2009.

125

Where Are We Today? The State of the Art in Artistic Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 126

Regrettably, the Fellowships in
the Creative and Performing
Arts scheme, operated by the
ahrc in the UK, was closed in
September 2009. In Norway, by
contrast, the government has
announced plans to fund additional projects in the field of
artistic research alongside the
fellowship programme.

A final example involves the fellowship
programmes for artists that exist in the UK and
in Norway. They are designed for mid-career
artists who are enabled to do full-time artistic research in affiliation with one of the arts schools.
This formula directly benefits both the artists’
practice and the educational institution. The
artists are temporarily freed from the pressure of
producing for the market, and can work on their artistic development
by doing research. The arts school benefits from the artists’ presence
through the seminars and workshops they teach and the best practices
they convey. In Norway, these programmes have governmental recognition as being on par with PhD programmes.
And now we are back to where we started. ‘Fundamental artistic research, beyond market-oriented art production, is the basis for the
future’, not just for Austria as a cultural nation, but for the development
of arts and culture throughout Europe.

126

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 127

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 128

Chapter 6

Artistic
Research as
Boundary
Work

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 129

Das ist eben die große Frage:
Wo steht die Kunst?
Welchen Ort hat sie?
Martin Heidegger*

* Martin Heidegger 1976, ‘Nur noch ein Gott kann uns retten’ [in conversation with
Rudolf Augstein and Georg Wolff on 23 September 1966], Der Spiegel, 30.23 (31 May), pp.
193-219 (p. 219). The entire conversation appears in Antwort: Martin Heidegger im
Gespräch, ed. by Günther Neske, and Emil Kettering (Pfullingen: Neske 1988), pp. 81-111.

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 130

Context
Three of my areas of interest intersect in this chapter,
which was written as a sort of pamphlet. My interest in
the currency of Hegel’s thesis on ‘the end of art’ dates to
the early 1990s. The issue of the potential of metaphysics, after its fall, engaged my thoughts in the late
1990s. In the same period, I also developed my interest
in the newer analytic philosophy, in particular in the
wake of the late Ludwig Wittgenstein. It formed the
inspiration for my ideas about non-conceptualism, realism, and contingency. In part, these are an elaboration
of an older publication of mine entitled ‘Holismus,
Wahrheit und Realismus: Adornos Musik-Denken aus
amerikanischer Sicht’ (Holism, Realism and Truth:
Adorno’s Musical Thought from an American Point of
View). An invitation to the conference ‘The Difference
of Art and Art Research across Disciplines’, held at
Zurich in April 2009, gave me the opportunity to link
these interests to artistic research. In this chapter I argue
that artistic research acknowledges the epistemic (and
moral) import of art. This chapter likewise required
fewer annotations.

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 131

The difference between art and artistic research
Asking how artistic research differs from art is a corollary of a broader
question: How does the domain of art differ from the domain of science? Or where does art stand in relation to science, or to politics and
morality, to the economy or to everyday life?
How art relates to science may seem obvious at first glance. Just
as there is an obvious difference between playing sports and studying
them in sport sciences, or between politics and
The ‘sport argument’ is used
political science, the distinction between art prac- more often. It could also be
tice and artistic research would seem as clear as heard during an afternoon semiday. Yet drawing boundaries like these is not al- nar on artistic research in July
2009 at the University of Amsterways easy. Consider the domain of the courts as dam’s Department of Philosophy.
compared to the legal sciences, or that of religion
in comparison to theology. And the recent financial crisis has made us painfully aware that the distinction between
the economy and economics is highly relative.
The attempt to distinguish what belongs to art practice from
what belongs to artistic research is reminiscent of what in the philosophy of science is known as the demarcation problem. It involves delimiting what can be considered part of science from what cannot, or
distinguishing what qualifies as science from mere pseudoscience. Karl
Popper’s influential views on this question are well known; he argued
that openness to falsification was the quality that distinguished science
from pseudoscience.
Demarcating our subject matter would amount to formulating
one or more principles that distinguish art from pseudo-art – or
rather, that distinguish art from non-art. Arthur C. Danto is one
writer who has expressed views on this. One of his insights is worth
highlighting in our context: no essentialist definition is possible of
what art is. The distinction between art and non-art is a construed
one, and it depends on what is recognised as such in the ‘art world’
(the totality of artists, art criticism, art theory, and art industry) at a
particular point in time (cf. Danto 1986). Such constructivism, which
we also encounter in post-Popperian philosophy and sociology of science in thinkers like Paul Feyerabend, Pierre Bourdieu, and Bruno Latour, radically qualifies the problem of demarcation. And this should

131

Artistic Research as Boundary Work

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 132

be a lesson to us as we examine the difference between art and artistic research.
We are interested here not so much in the difference between art
and non-art as we are in demarcating the domain of art practice from
the domain of science or research, or the domain of morality, or that
of daily life. Here, too, demarcations, dichotomies, definitions, and
identities are problematic – an insight also celebrated in poststructuralism. The issue of the essence of art has been supplanted by that of
the dynamics of the art world, where different life domains may meet
and interpenetrate one another. Attempts to address this question may
be labelled as ‘boundary work’ (Gieryn 1983). In trying to fathom
something of the dynamics of the art world, one cannot assume a stable concept of art; the presumed boundaries of that world are the subject of constant debate.
Artistic research also qualifies as such boundary work – and in
two different directions. Artistic research is an activity undertaken in
the borderland between the art world and the academic world. The topics, the questions, as well as the results of such research are judged, and
have meaning, both in the art world and in academia. And in this respect artistic research appears to differ from more traditional academic
research, whose relevance and validity is determined primarily within
the community of peers, within the walls of academia, within the world
of the universities.
At least that was the image many people had of academic research
until recently. That image is now substantially altered. The international
debate on the relevance and valorisation of academic research, the advent of transdisciplinary research programmes, and the recognition of
non-traditional forms of knowledge production (such as Mode 2; Gibbons et al. 1994) have all shown that the context of justification of academic research lies in both academia and society. The quality of the
research is determined by an extended peer group in which stakeholders from the context of application also have a voice. I say ‘also’ because
the basis on which research is judged, as well as the final word over that
judgment, still resides in the academic community of peers.

132

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 133

Intermezzo 1: On peer review

The commonly used doubleblind peer review system is imperfect and subject to bias. More
and more academic forums
nowadays are opting for more
advanced kinds of peer review,
such as open name review, published review, and pre-publication or open-process collaboration. The Journal for Artistic Research has done likewise (see

The peer review system may be regarded as a
sign of the independence and maturity of the
domain of science. Within that domain, the forum of peers is the first to decide what is relevant
and what the quality standards will be. Mutual
peer assessment of quality and validity is also required in the case of newer forms of knowledge
production, preferably in an open and blind assessment process in accepted academic channels.
So how, then, is the relevance and the quality of art and artistic
research assessed? When asked which people judge the quality of artistic research, the head of a prestigious postgraduate art institute in the
Netherlands recently replied ‘artists and experts’. By ‘experts’ he meant
curators, critics, theoreticians…
It is true that what art is is not determined by artists alone, but is
‘defined’ in the ‘art world’ (to follow Danto and Howard Becker), in the
‘field of cultural production’ (to follow Pierre Bourdieu), in the ‘network
of actors’ (to follow Bruno Latour). Yet the question remains: Who are
the experts? Who are the peers? Wouldn’t it attest to the maturity of artistic research if the dominant influence of curators and other ‘secondary’
actors were to come to an end? Or, more cautiously perhaps, shouldn’t
the artist-researchers themselves accede to the forum of peers that determines what has relevance and quality? Fortunately, we now see the
phenomenon of the artist-curator popping up here and there. Emphasising the importance of the artist-researcher as part of the community
of peers would greatly benefit the emerging field of artistic research.

The idea of art as an autonomous sphere
(and the story of its eighteenth-century
emancipation)
The following tale may be told of the relationship between art and the
domains of science and morality. Once upon a time, in Greek antiquity, thinkers like Plato emphasised the unity of beauty, truth, and
goodness. But over the course of history, the life spheres of art, science,
and morality grew apart, until, in the eighteenth century, they became

133

Artistic Research as Boundary Work

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 134

not only institutionally, but also theoretically, autonomous. This differentiation between aesthetics, epistemology, and ethics – which Kant
provided with an impressive foundation in his Critiques – still persists
today, although ‘the unity of reason in the diversity of its voices’1 was
also emphasised from Kant onwards.
The birth of the autonomous spheres of Art and Aesthetics
(duly capitalised) in the eighteenth century was signalled by two publications: Charles Batteux’s Les Beaux Arts réduits à un même principe
(The Fine Arts Reduced to a Single Principle) from 1748 and Alexander G. Baumgarten’s Aesthetica from 1750. Batteux’s work raised three
issues. First, the system of fine arts constitutes an autonomous sphere
(for Batteux, it comprised painting, sculpture, music, poetry, and
dance). Second, these arts converge on a single principle. Third, that
principle is the subject matter of philosophical aesthetics. Here ends our
little history of Art’s emancipation in the eighteenth century.
That history has especially made itself felt since Paul O. Kristeller
published his two-part article ‘The Modern System of the Arts: A Study
in the History of Aesthetics’ in the Journal of the
Kristeller is a Renaissance speHistory of Ideas in 1951 and 1952. This study, which
cialist, but his ‘Modern System’
traces the history of the system of arts from Greek
extends beyond his own professional sphere. ‘Classic is perhaps
antiquity to the twentieth century, is still broadly
too modest a description, as the
authoritative in art history circles today. It often
leading ideas in Kristeller’s piece
were subsequently adopted as
also figures as an implicit assumption in the
established orthodoxy among
broader discourse on art. Kristeller’s system of arts,
historians and philosophers of
by the way, consists of painting, sculpture, archiart and by intellectual and cultural historians, and they are
tecture, music, and poetry, with dance relegated to
now more or less legion’ (Porter
the second rank (with engraving, gardening, the2009, pages 1-2).
atre, opera, and prose) (Kristeller 1951/52).
Very recently (in the spring of 2009), a remarkable article by James I. Porter (2009) appeared in the British Journal of Aesthetics entitled ‘Is Art Modern? Kristeller’s “Modern System
of the Arts” Reconsidered’. It presents a radical challenge to Kristeller’s
‘system’. Porter claims first of all that ‘the system of the arts’ is a historical construction – and more likely an invention of Kristeller than
1. Jürgen Habermas, ‘Die Einheit der Vernunft in der Vielheit ihrer Stimmen’ (2009).

134

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 135

an accurate description from the historical sources. He then argues that
the bond between the presumed autonomous spheres of the arts and
of philosophical aesthetics was not as tight as Kristeller claims, and that
aesthetic formalism was a twentieth-century aberration. Finally, he attempts to show that the arts are always, and have always been, linked
in one way or another to intellectual or moral content. Interestingly,
he supports this with evidence from the likes of Clement Greenberg,
who, in his well-known appeal for materialistic objectivity, flatness, and
physical quality, refers to the eighteenth century, claiming that the arts
concealed their ‘mediality’ at that time by focusing on literature – that
is, on intellectual and moral content and meaning (Porter 2009: 4-6).

Intermezzo 2: The end of art (or how art
connects to other life domains)
In the discourse on art, the issue of ‘the end of art’ crops up from time
to time, for instance in the work of Danto. In the transition from
Greenbergian modernist abstraction to postmodernist art that began in
the mid-1960s, Danto saw a rupture that signalled the end of the immanent developmental history of art. Post-historical art had become
conceptual; assessing it was based not primarily on sensory perception,
but on intellectual consideration (whereby Danto assumes that the two
are fundamentally separate). This brought the history of the narrative,
pictorial tradition to an end (Danto 1986: 81-117).
Danto varies a theme that has accompanied the ‘project of the
modern’ since Georg W.F. Hegel. But the distance to Hegel has grown
rather wide. Here is Hegel’s (1975, vol. 1: 10, 11, 103) voice in his Lectures on Aesthetics in the 1820s:
Art no longer affords that satisfaction of spiritual needs which
earlier ages and nations sought in it, and found in it alone.
Art is and remains for us, on the side of its highest vocation,
something past.
For us, art counts no longer as the highest mode in which truth
fashions an existence for itself.

135

Artistic Research as Boundary Work

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 136

Those ‘spiritual needs’, ‘highest vocation’, and ‘truth’ have certainly slipped
away from us in the course of history. Or at least, few people would venture to utter such grand terms today. But Hegel’s ‘end of art’ does not mean
that art is not to develop further. Here is Hegel (p. 130) again:
We may well hope that art will always rise higher and come to
perfection, but the form of art has ceased to be the supreme need
of the spirit.
Here, ‘the end of art’ is the end of art’s ability to give appropriate expression to the Absolute Spirit. It is a farewell to transcendence, to a glorification of art which had been so celebrated by early-Romantic
philosophising intellectuals but a short time previously.
But perhaps it is better to speak of a ‘naturalisation’ or ‘humanisation’ of transcendence. Here is Hegel (p. 607) once more:
Art [...] makes Humanus its new holy of holies: i.e., the depths
and heights of the human heart as such, mankind in its joys and
sorrows, its strivings, deeds, and fates.
After the end of art, art concerns itself with ‘Humanus’. A bond with
our concrete human life now steps into the stead of art’s bond with the
absolute, the infinite. The end of art means a reconfirmation of art’s
bond with who we are and where we stand – a reassertion of the connectedness of art to our intellectual and moral life. Today we can endorse this, without referring to Hegel.

Naturalisation of transcendence:
A metaphysics of art – after its fall
Our current situation lies in the wake of the linguistic and pragmatic
turns in theory. The constitutive roles of language and action have superseded ‘reason’ and ‘reality’, which, in traditional epistemology and
metaphysics, were the foundations on which the edifice of our knowledge rested. We find ourselves in the wake of the farewell to the grands
récits (Lyotard) – in the wake of postmodernism, understood as a
poignant, melancholic farewell to modernism, or as a cheerful inau-

136

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 137

guration of Nietzschean perspectivism. We have discarded our naive belief in meta-narratives, and have grown more modest about our potential to get a grip on physical and social reality. We are now in a time
that follows the clean-up work done by deconstructivism and ordinary
language philosophy. The remnants of the once stable framework of
meaning, knowledge, and reality that buttressed the edifice of art, science, and morality have now been permanently abandoned on the junk
heap of history.
‘Metaphysics of art – after its
What we now need is a metaphysics of art, fall’ refers to Theodor W.
after its fall. Also after Hegel’s time, naturalisation Adorno, who concluded his
of transcendence means both taking leave of book Negative Dialectics with
the statement ‘There is solidarioverly high pretensions (which still linger today in ty between such thinking and
the minds of many) as well as preserving the metaphysics at the time of its
awareness that art has the power, or gives us the fall.’ Cf. my annotation in
chapter 5, page 122.
power, to critically transcend the reality in which
we find ourselves and which we are. That is metaphysics as it is possible after its fall. There is a sense in which the task
is to overcome metaphysics and a sense in which the task is to continue
metaphysical discussion (cf. Putnam 1990: 19).
Cognizant of the bond between art and our intellectual and
moral life, artistic research seeks to achieve a reflective articulation of
that critical transcendence. It thereby concerns and affects our relationship to the world and to ourselves. That is what I have elsewhere
called the ‘realism’ of artistic research.
In all this, we should keep two things in mind. First, we experience more than we can say. That does not just apply to art, of course,
but to our whole relationship to the world and to other people. Art has
no exclusive rights here, but this pre-reflective immediacy particularly
manifests itself in creative processes, in works of art, and in artistic experiences. The early-Romantic echo in this wording is no accident. Of
course we can no longer fall back on an uncritical understanding of art,
and of course art has become reflexive. But here, too, there is a sense
in which we are now beyond the vaulting claims of early Romanticism,
and a sense in which we are still the heirs of this now naturalised realm
of thought. The reflexivity of art – its quality of both questioning itself and giving food for thought, and of thus also showing a ‘concep-

137

Artistic Research as Boundary Work

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 138

tual’ dimension – must not be construed in opposition to the, in a philosophical sense, non-conceptual content that lies enclosed in it. In
artistic research, we are concerned directly with that pre-reflective, nonconceptual content, as enacted in creative processes and embodied in
works of art. In this way, art invites us to critically transcend what is.
Artistic research is the acceptance of that invitation.
But at the same time we should bear in mind that we might be
wrong in our critical transcendences. That is the fallibilism of artistic
research. After all, it offers a fundamentally open perspective on what
is or could be. That is the contingency of artistic research – a contingency that derives directly from the fact that the content of art cannot
entirely be captured in any epistemological project whatsoever.
Metaphysics of art – after its fall, after the end of art, after postmodernism – means an understanding of art as a critical reflective practice, encompassing non-conceptual content, which sets our aesthetic,
intellectual, and moral life into motion. It also means an understanding of artistic research as the practice of that fundamentally unfinished
critical reflection.

138

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 139

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 140

Chapter 7

The Production
of Knowledge
in Artistic
Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 141

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 142

Context
This is a chapter in which many themes from preceding chapters come together. After an introduction and
a preliminary account, I position artistic research in
academia as a field of endeavour that has both kinships
and contrasts with other disciplines. In the second half
of the chapter, I critically examine the criteria for doing
research in the new field, possibly amending or at least
refining them. Such refinements will be needed as
I later weigh up the assessment criteria for artistic
research in terms of the reviewers’ guidelines for the
Journal for Artistic Research (chapters 10 and 11). Like
the previous chapter, this one concludes with subsections on non-conceptualism, realism, and contingency
in artistic research. These reflections invite additional
research. The voices of Theodor W. Adorno, Ludwig
Wittgenstein, and also Stanley Cavell can be heard here.

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 143

This chapter examines artistic research as a form of knowledge production. It will conclude, however, by saying that artistic research
seeks not so much to make explicit the knowledge
The reader might skip this inthat art is said to produce, but rather to provide troduction and the next section
a specific articulation of the pre-reflective, non- (pages 143-149) of the chapter, as
conceptual content of art. It thereby invites ‘un- it is mostly a recap of what was
said before, and continue the
finished thinking’. Hence, it is not formal knowl- reading with ‘Affinities …’.
edge that is the subject matter of artistic research,
but thinking in, through, and with art.
The expression ‘artistic research’ connects two domains: art and
academia. Obviously the term can also be used in a general sense. Every
artist does research as she works, as she tries to find the right material,
the right subject, as she looks for information and techniques to use in
her studio or atelier, or when she encounters something, changes
something, or begins anew in the course of her work. Artistic research
in the emphatic sense – and as used in this chapter – unites the artistic and the academic in an enterprise that impacts on both domains.
Art thereby transcends its former limits, aiming through the research
to contribute to thinking and understanding; academia, for its part,
opens up its boundaries to forms of thinking and understanding that
are interwoven with artistic practices. These specific ‘border violations’ can spark a good deal of tension. The relationship between art
and academia is uneasy, but challenging. That is one reason why the issue of demarcation between the artistic and the academic has been one
of the most widely discussed topics in the debate on artistic research in
the past fifteen years.1
A related issue of demarcation is at play in the relationship between academia and ‘artistic development’ and ‘artistic practice’. In
1. The demarcations and dichotomies employed in this chapter should not be interpreted
too absolutely, but rather taken as imperfect dialectical tools to put the subject matter into
perspective. See [chapter 2 of this volume] for a discussion of this problem of demarcation;
and see Candlin (2000) [and chapter 3] for insights into the uneasy relationship between
art and academia. The relationship between the seemingly undisciplined artistic and the
ultimately disciplinary academic makes the project of artistic research into an endeavour in
which that relationship is a constant focus. Is this state of uneasiness and reflexivity something to be overcome, or is it intrinsic to the place of artistic research in academia?

143

The Production of Knowledge in Artistic Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 144

some quarters, one prefers to speak not of artistic research, but of ‘artistic development’.2 The word ‘research’ stays reserved for activities in traditional universities or industrial research centres. Indeed there is
something to be said for preferring the term ‘artistic development’.
Artistic research certainly contributes to the development of the arts,
just as all other research tries to contribute to the discipline in question.
Research and development are intimately entwined, and it may sometimes make sense to highlight the developmental aspect, especially when
one is inclined to question the importance of research for art practice.
One issue that continually resurfaces in the debate involves where, precisely, the distinction lies between art practice in itself and art practice
as research. Although I will not address this question explicitly here, it
will be present in the background. The entanglement of artistic research
with art practice and with artistic development is so close that a conceptual distinction often appears contrived.3
In discussing artistic research as a form of knowledge production,
I begin by tentatively describing this type of research – in terms of subject, method, context, and outcome – as research
The four E’s – embeddedness,
in and through art practice. Embedded in artistic
enclosure, enactment, embodiand academic contexts, artistic research seeks to
ment – correspond to four dimensions: the context, the reconvey and communicate content that is enception, the production, and the
closed in aesthetic experiences, enacted in creative
artwork.
practices, and embodied in artistic products.
In the second section, I explore similarities
and differences between artistic research and other spheres of academic research, in the domains of humanities, aesthetics, and social sciences and in fields of natural science and technology. Artistic research,
so I will claim, distinguishes itself in specific respects from each of these
2. In the Netherlands, a government advisory committee has advised using the term
ontwerp en ontwikkeling (design and development) to denote research activities in nonuniversity professional schools. Norway uses the term kunstnerisk utviklingsarbeid (artistic
development work), Austria uses Entwicklung und Erschließung der Künste (development
and promotion of the arts), and some people in Denmark and Germany also tend to
avoid words for ‘research’ such as forskning or Forschung.
3. Such distinctions are usually made by people who first create a caricature of the one
activity, believing they are protecting the other activity by doing so.

144

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 145

research traditions, whereby neither the natural science model, the humanities model, nor the social science model can serve as a benchmark
for artistic research.
The third section addresses the issue of whether artistic research
can be considered academic research. By virtue of its distinctive context, its studio-based research practice, the specific types of knowledge
and understanding it deals with, and its unconventional forms of documentation and dissemination, artistic research occupies its own place
in the realm of academic research.
I conclude the chapter with a series of observations on the epistemology and metaphysics of artistic research. The current programme
of phenomenologically inspired cognitive science offers tools for examining the issue of the non-conceptual content4 enclosed in artworks and art practices. Clearly research in and through artistic practices is partly concerned with our perception, our understanding, our
relationship to the world and to other people. Art thereby invites reflection, yet it eludes any defining thought regarding its content. Artistic research is the acceptance of that paradoxical invitation. It furthermore enhances our awareness of the pre-reflective nearness of things as
well as our epistemological distance from them. This makes artistic research an open undertaking, seeking the deliberate articulation of unfinished thinking in and through art.

A preliminary account of artistic research as
research in and through art practice:
Subject, method, context, outcome
Despite all the differences of opinion that exist within the ascendant
programme of artistic research, there seems to be general agreement
about one thing: the practice of the arts is central to artistic research.
On the surface, such an assumption seems commonplace. After all,
doesn’t all research that engages with the arts concentrate on ‘the prac4. The reflexivity of art – its quality of both questioning itself and giving food for
thought, and of thus also showing a ‘conceptual’ dimension – must not be construed in
opposition to the (in a philosophical sense) non-conceptual and pre-reflective or unreflective content that lies enclosed in it. For an anthology on this subject, see Gunther 2003.

145

The Production of Knowledge in Artistic Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 146

tice of the arts’? Even disciplines like historical or sociological research
on the arts focus on that.
In the case of artistic research, however, art practice plays a different role – and in terms of science theory a more fundamental one.
Characteristic of artistic research is that art practice (the works of art,
the artistic actions, the creative processes) is not just the motivating factor and the subject matter of research, but that this artistic practice –
the practice of creating and performing in the atelier or studio5 – is central to the research process itself. Methodologically speaking, the creative process forms the pathway (or part of it) through which new insights, understandings, and products come into being.
Another distinguishing feature is that contemporary art practice
constitutes the relevant context for the research, alongside the academic
forum. The research derives its significance not only from the new insights it contributes to the discourse on art, but also from the outcomes
in the form of new products and experiences which are meaningful in
the world of art. In part, then, the outcomes of artistic research are artworks, installations, performances, and other artistic practices; and this
is another quality that differentiates it from humanities or social science
research, where art practice may be the object of the research, but not
the outcome. This means that art practice is paramount as the subject
matter, the method, the context, and the outcome of artistic research.
That is what is meant by expressions like ‘practice-based’ or ‘studiobased’ research.
In the literature on artistic research, we regularly see a distinction made between research on the arts, research for the arts, and research in the arts. This differentiation, which derives from, but also deviates from, categories proposed by Frayling (1993) [and cf. chapter 2
of the present volume], expresses different perspectives on the status of
art practice. The interpretive perspective (‘research on the arts’) is
common to the research traditions of the humanities and social sciences,
5. I use an expanded notion of ‘studio’, referring to artistic experimental practice in
which the studio or atelier might be an element, but does not always need be. Many contemporary artists are not physically located in the studio, or they even oppose such an
isolated, non-situated position and condition.

146

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 147

which observe a certain theoretical distance when they make art practice their object of study. The instrumental perspective (‘research for the
arts’) is characteristic of the more applied, often technical research done
in the service of art practice; this research delivers, as it were, the tools
and the material knowledge that can then be applied in practice, in the
artistic process, and in the artistic product itself. In this case, art practice is not the object of study, but its objective. And as we see, the place
of artistic practice becomes more central to the research here.
We can justifiably speak of artistic research (‘research in the arts’)
when that artistic practice is not only the result of the research, but also
its methodological vehicle, when the research unfolds in and through
the acts of creating and performing. This is a distinguishing feature of
this research type within the whole of academic research.
This is not to say that viewpoints in art criticism, social and political theory, or technology play no part in artistic research. As a rule
they do play a part. The discourses about art, social context, and the materiality of the medium are in fact partially constitutive of artistic practices and products. The distinctiveness of artistic research, nevertheless,
derives from the paramount place that artistic practice occupies as the
subject, context, method, and outcome of the research. Methodological pluralism – the view that various approaches deriving from the humanities, social sciences, or science and technology may play a part in
artistic research – should be regarded as complementary to the principle that the research takes place in and through the creation of art.
Behind the four specified dimensions of artistic research – subject, method, context, and outcome – are a range of problems that require more detailed analysis. First, the content of what artistic research investigates seems to elude direct access. It has an experiential
component that cannot be efficiently expressed linguistically (cf. Biggs
2004). The subject of the research is partly the je ne sais quoi of artistic, aesthetic experience;6 as a matter of principle, it refuses every ex6. No distinction is made in this context between the artistic, aesthetic experience of the
artist during the production process and the experience the audience has in receiving the
artwork. Both the production and the reception of art have an experiential component that
evades the conceptual grip.

147

The Production of Knowledge in Artistic Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 148

planatory gaze. What ontological status does this research object have?
What sort of content lies enclosed in artistic experience? And how can
one articulate that content?
Second, the focus, in the research process, on the practice of creating and performing is in line with what has been called the ‘practice
turn in contemporary theory’ (Schatzki et al. 2001). Knowledge and experiences are constituted only in and through practices, actions, and interactions. In the context of discovery, pre-reflective artistic actions embody knowledge in a form that is not directly accessible for justification.
What is the methodological import of this ‘enacted approach’ in artistic research? Is the researcher trying to reveal something of the secrets
of the creative process, of artistic practice, or is the methodological deployment of the artistic creative process best suited because it takes an
unmediated route to investigate from inside what is at work in art?
Third, works of art and artistic practices are not self-contained;
they are situated and embedded. The meaning of art is generated in interactions with relevant surroundings. As noted above, the context in
which artistic research takes place is formed both by the art world and
by academic discourse; the relevance of the subjects and the validity of
the outcomes are weighed in the light of both those contexts. Yet the
situatedness of artworks and art practices also raises the question of the
situatedness of practice-based research done within them. Does that research always aim to shed light on the way that artworks and practices
affect our relationship to the world and to other people? Or can that
research also confine itself to articulations that do not go beyond the
domain of the artistic and the aesthetic?
Fourth, the experiences and insights that artistic research delivers
are embodied in the resulting art practices and products. In part, these material outcomes are non-conceptual and non-discursive, and their persuasive quality lies in the performative power through which they broaden
our aesthetic experience, invite us to fundamentally unfinished thinking,
and prompt us towards a critical perspective on what there is. What is the
epistemological status of these embodied forms of experience, knowledge,
and criticism? And what relation does the material-performative have to
the rational-discursive and the engaged-critical in the research?
In the debate on artistic research, these ontological, method-

148

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 149

ological, contextual, and epistemological issues are still the subject of extensive discussion. In anticipation of a more elaborate account, the following preliminary characterisation can already be given: artistic research
– embedded in artistic and academic contexts – is the articulation of the
unreflective, non-conceptual content enclosed in aesthetic experiences,
enacted in creative practices, and embodied in artistic products.

Affinities and differences to other academic
research traditions
Artistic research has both historical and systematic affinities to a range
of philosophical and scientific research traditions. A historiography of
artistic research (which remains to be underCf. my annotation in chapter 4,
taken) might show that, from the Renaissance to page 77.
the Bauhaus, there has always been research conducted in and through artistic practices. The fact
that such research in retrospect often does not qualify as ‘academic research’ may say less about the research itself than about what we currently understand by ‘academic’.7
The domain of art has long been interlaced with that of academia, from the practice of the artes in the late medieval monastery
schools right up to today’s postmodern farewell to the separation between the life domains of art, knowledge, and
In the previous chapter, I exammorality that has characterised modernity since ined the engagement of art and
the eighteenth century. In the current discourse artistic research with our intelon art, the realm of the aesthetic has reconnected lectual and moral life. The
‘agenda’ of The Conflict of the
with the epistemic and the ethical. The emer- Faculties involves both the elucigence of artistic research is consistent with this dation and the enhancement of
movement to no longer subordinate the faculties the relationship between artistic
research and academia.
of the human mind to one another, either theoretically or institutionally.
7. Historiography needs to show modesty in two directions. The normative structure of
today’s academia should be neither a measure for evaluating the past nor a predictor to
judge how intellectual and artistic efforts will be valued in the future. Current developments within academia, such as those involving commercialisation of academic research
or the advent of hybrid transdisciplinary research programmes, show that the edifice of
science is under constant reconstruction.

149

The Production of Knowledge in Artistic Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 150

On the contemporary research agenda at the interface of phenomenology, cognitive sciences, and philosophy of the mind, we now
encounter a theme that is also central to artistic research: non-conceptual knowledge and experience as embodied in practices and products. I will come back to this in [the] final section [of this chapter]. I
shall now make a series of comparisons between artistic research and
research in the humanities (cultural and arts studies in particular),
philosophical aesthetics, qualitative social science research, and technology and natural science research.
Humanities
There is a self-evident kinship between artistic research and the research in musicology, art history, theatre and dance studies, comparative literature, architectural theory, and moving image and new media studies, as well as the research in cultural studies or sociology of
the arts. In all such academic disciplines or programmes, art (the art
world, art practice, artworks) is the subject of systematic or historical
research. A wide array of conceptual frameworks, theoretical perspectives, and research strategies are employed, which one might
summarise with the umbrella term ‘grand theories of our culture’ –
among them hermeneutics, structuralism, semiotics, deconstruction,
pragmatism, critical theory, cultural analysis. To study its research objects, each such approach has its own specific instruments available –
iconography, musical analysis, source studies, ethnomethodology, actor-network theory.
Important for a comparison with artistic research is that those
frameworks, perspectives, and strategies generally approach the arts
with a certain theoretical distance. That is even true of fields like
hermeneutics, which acknowledge that the horizons of the interpreter
and the interpreted may temporarily merge, or cultural analysis,
where theory may be seen as a discourse that ‘that can be brought to
bear on the object at the same time as the object can be brought to
bear on it’ (Bal 2002: 61; italics in original). Obviously the dividing
lines cannot always be clearly drawn, and any delimitations will always be partly artificial. In the research agendas just mentioned,
however, the interpretive, verbally discursive approach appears to

150

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 151

prevail above research strategies that are more practice-imbued. And
precisely here lies a characteristic feature of artistic research: the experimental practice of creating and performing pervades the research
at every turn. In this respect, artistic research has more in common
with technical design research or with participatory action research
than with research in the humanities.
The kinship with the humanities is often
This is also the case with the
reflected in institutional proximity. Research cen- Academy for Creative and Pertres, research groups, and individual researchers forming Arts at Leiden Univerthat engage in practice-based research in the arts sity and the PhD Research in
the Arts programme of the
are often accommodated in arts and humanities Netherlands Organisation for
faculties and departments. Funding for their re- Scientific Research (nwo),
search often also comes from humanities research which are accommodated in a
humanities faculty or section. A
councils and funding agencies (and this partly ex- contrasting example is the Complains the impassioned nature of the demarcation mittee for Artistic Research and
debate between art scholars and artist-re- Development of the Swedish
Research Council, which broke
searchers). Outside the traditional universities, at away from the Scientific Counprofessional schools of the arts, artistic research cil for the Humanities and Socan develop more freely, although here, too, it cial Sciences in 2010 and now
continues as an independent enmay be accommodated in a separate department tity under the council’s execufor art theory and/or cultural studies. The im- tive board.
portance of interpretation, theory, and reflection in artists’ training cannot be emphasised
too strongly, just as technical knowledge of artistry is also a sine qua
non. But the prime focus in artistic research is on concrete creative practice. The research aims to make a substantial, preferably cutting-edge
contribution to the development of that practice – a practice that is
just as much saturated with histories, beliefs, and theories as it is based
on skilful expert action and tacit understanding.
Aesthetics
A rich source for the artistic research programme is philosophical aesthetics, which has studied the non-conceptual knowledge embodied in
art since the eighteenth century. I will highlight three examples from this
tradition: the liberation of sensory knowledge in Baumgarten, the cultural value of the aesthetic idea in Kant, and the epistemic character of

151

The Production of Knowledge in Artistic Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 152

art in Adorno.8 The purpose of my brief review here is to show that the
issue of the non-conceptual content in art has not appeared out of the
blue, but has been thought through in many ways in centuries past.
Alexander Baumgarten called it analogon rationis: the ability of the
human mind, analogous to reason, to obtain clear, but purely sensory,
knowledge about reality. Great art is pre-emiThe title of the Sensuous Knowlnently capable of manifesting that perfect sensory
edge conference series in Norknowledge. In our context, the significance of
way (2003–2009) was inspired
by Baumgarten’s term (see also
Baumgarten’s views lies in his accentuation of the
chapter 11, page 220).
sensory, experiential knowledge component in
artistic research (cf. Kjørup 2006). In post-Baumgarten art research and aesthetics, the links to epistemology and perception became less prominent. The theme of sensory, non-discursive
knowledge has regained currency in our times in research taking an embedded, enacted, and embodied approach to mind and perception.9
Immanuel Kant’s critical investigation of what today is called the
non-conceptual content of aesthetic experience culminated in his legendary articulation of the aesthetic idea as a ‘representation of the imagination which induces much thought, yet without the possibility of any
definite thought whatever, namely concept, being adequate to it, and
which language, consequently, can never get quite on level terms with or
render completely intelligible’ (Kant 1978 [1790/93]: §49). Kant assigned greater cultural significance to this non-conceptual realm of the
artistic, which in Baumgarten had remained limited to sensory knowledge. Characteristic of artistic products, processes, and experiences is that
– in and through the materiality of the medium – something is presented
which transcends materiality. (Kant identifies here one of the links connecting the worlds of imagination and pure reason to the ‘intelligible
world’ – a transcendence later elevated by Hegel into the ‘sensory manifestation of the Idea’. After the linguistic and pragmatic turns in philosophy, what now matters is a naturalised understanding of this tran8. A more extensive reconstruction of philosophical aesthetics in its relation to artistic
research would draw on topics from Hegel, Heidegger, Lyotard, and others.
9. For an overview of this cognitive science agenda, see Kiverstein and Clark (2009) in a
special edition of Topoi dedicated to the subject.

152

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 153

scendence; it all depends, of course, on what we
‘Naturalised’ – see chapter 6,
mean by ‘naturalised’.) Artistic research focuses page 136-39.
both on the materiality of art – to the extent that
this makes the immaterial possible – and on the
immateriality of art – to the extent that this is embedded in the art world,
enacted in creative processes, and embodied in the artistic material.
The significance of Kant’s analysis lies in part in the distinction
he drew in his Critique of Judgement between judgment of art and judgment of taste. Taste judgment (as analysed in ‘Analytic of the Beautiful’)
focuses on the formal aspects of beauty, including disinterestedness and
purposiveness without purpose. Art judgment surpasses taste or aesthetic
judgment, because it focuses on the cultural value of artworks as well
as on their beauty. That cultural value lies in their capacity to ‘leave
[something] over for reflection’ and to ‘dispose […] the spirit to Ideas’
(Kant 1978 [1790/93]: §53, §52). This is the quality through which art
gives food for thought and distinguishes itself from a mere aesthetic gratification of the senses. The content of the aesthetic experience is identified more specifically here as that which brings thinking into motion,
as it were, or as that which invites to reflection. Artistic practices are
therefore performative practices, in the sense that artworks and creative
processes do something to us, set us in motion, alter our understanding and view of the world, also in a moral sense. We encounter this performative aspect of art in artistic research to the extent that it involves
the concrete articulation of what moves and engages us.
The ability of art, as articulated in artistic research, to speak to
us is compellingly present in the work of Theodor W. Adorno. Here,
the cultural value of art lies in its ‘epistemic character’ (Erkenntnischarakter), through which art reveals the concealed truth about the dark
reality of society. Whereas in Baumgarten the non-conceptual content
of art liberates itself from explicit rational knowledge, and whereas in
Kant the non-conceptual aesthetic content invites us to reflection,
Adorno assigns this content an even more potent and critical valence
as the only thing that is capable – because it is antithetical to societal
reality – of keeping alive the utopian perspective of a better world, and
of recalling the original (albeit broken) promise of happiness. As no one
after him, Adorno thought through art’s engagement with the world

153

The Production of Knowledge in Artistic Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 154

and with our lives. Even if we distance ourselves from his dialectics and
his philosophy of history, all engagement that lies enclosed in contemporary art and art criticism must take account of his legacy.
Art’s epistemic character resides in its ability to offer the very reflection on who we are, on where we stand, that is obscured from sight
by the discursive and conceptual procedures of scientific rationality.
Noteworthy in Adorno is that thoughts and concepts are still always
needed – thoughts and concepts which, as it
‘Entäußerte wirklich der Gedanwere, assemble themselves around a work of art,
ke sich an die Sache […], so bein such a way that the art object itself begins to
gänne das Object unter dem
verweilenden Blick des Gedanspeak under the lingering gaze of the thought.
kens selber zu reden’ (Adorno
Herein may lie a key to exploring the relationship
1966: 36).
between the discursive and the artistic in artistic
research.10
Social science
In the discourse about knowledge in artistic research, some observers
emphasise the types of knowledge acquisition and production that derive from models of natural science explanation, quantitative analysis, and empirical logical deduction, which are encountered in the exact sciences, as well as in types of social science that follow natural
science methods. Contrasting with this tradition of explanation and
deduction is the academic tradition which, especially since the rise of
interpretive (verstehende) sociology, seeks to ‘understand’ social and
cultural phenomena. In the past hundred years,
The bulk of social science rea qualitative research paradigm, inspired by
search, nonetheless, is mainly
hermeneutics, has developed which in many
quantitative.
ways gives direction to social science research being done at present. It regards verstehende inter10. Adorno 1966: 36, and cf. Borgdorff 1998a: 300. The debate on the relationship between the discursive and the artistic, between the verbal and the demonstrable, often centres on whether the research process should be documented in writing and whether a verbal interpretation can be given of the research results. A third option is perhaps more
interesting: a discursive approach to the research which does not take the place of the
artistic ‘reasoning’, but instead ‘imitates’, suggests, or alludes to what is being ventured in
the artistic research. See also the subsection ‘Documentation, Dissemination’ in the third
section of this chapter.

154

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 155

pretation and practical participation as more relevant than logical explanation and theoretical distance.
Artistic research shows a certain kinship to some of these research
traditions. In ethnographic and action research in particular, strategies
have been developed that can be useful to artists in their practice-based
research; these include participant observation, performance ethnography, field study, autobiographical narrative, thick description, reflection in action, and collaborative inquiry. The often critical and engaged ethnographic research strategy acknowledges the mutual
interpenetration of the subjects and objects of field research. It might
serve as a model for some types of research in the arts, given that the
artist’s own practice is the ‘field’ of investigation.
Action research aims at transforming and enhancing practice,
and as such it also has affinities with artistic research, as the latter seeks
not only to increase knowledge and understanding, but also to further
develop artistic practice and enrich the artistic universe with new
products and practices. Artistic research is inseparably linked to artistic development. In the intimacy of experimental studio practice, we
can recognise the cycle of learning in action research, where research
findings give immediate cause for changes and improvements. This is
also recognisable in the engaged outreach and impact of the research
– artistic research delivers new experiences and insights that bear on the
art world and on how we understand and relate to the world and ourselves. Artistic research is therefore not just embedded in artistic and
academic contexts, and it focuses not just on what is enacted in creative
processes and embodied in art products, but it also engages with who
we are and where we stand.
The ‘practice turn’ in the humanities and social sciences not only
sheds light on the constitutive role of practices, actions, and interactions. Sometimes it even represents a shift from text-centred research
to performance-centred research, whereby practices and products themselves become the material-symbolic forms of expression, as opposed
to the numerical and verbal forms used by quantitative and qualitative
research. Artistic research also fits into this framework, since artistic
practices form the core of the research in the methodological sense, as
well as part of the material outcome of the research. This broadening

155

The Production of Knowledge in Artistic Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 156

of qualitative social science research to include research in and through
art practice has led some observers to argue for a new distinguishing paradigm (Haseman 2006).11
The methodological and epistemological issues of artistic research
are also addressed in the key writings relating to arts-based research in
the tradition of the Eisner school (Eisner 1981; Knowles and Coles
2008). In studying the role of art in educational practice and human
development, these social scientists use insights from cognitive psychology to argue the importance of artistic-cognitive development of
the self, in particular in primary and secondary education.
Science and technology
Art practices are technically mediated practices. Whether this involves
the acoustical characteristics of musical instruments, the physical properties of art materials, the structure of a building, or the digital architecture of a virtual installation, art practices and artworks are materially
anchored. Artistic practices are technically mediated at a more abstract
level of materiality as well. Consider the knowledge of counterpoint in
music, of colour in painting, of editing in filmmaking, or of bodily techniques in dance. Technical and material knowledge are therefore indispensable components in the professional training and practice of artists.
Research that focuses on this technical and material side of art
in order to improve applications, develop innovative procedures, or explore new artistic possibilities can rightly be called applied research. The
knowledge obtained in exploratory technological and scientific research is put into practice in artistic procedures and products. This is
research done in the service of artistic practice.
In artistic research itself, by comparison, art practice is not only
the test of the research, but it also plays a critical role methodologically.
11. Whether artistic research constitutes a new paradigm is not something that can be decided here and now. Biggs and Büchler (2008: 12) rightly point out that the ‘criteria that
define academic research per se’ must be met whether research is conducted under a new
or an existing paradigm. I concur with Kjørup (2011: 41) that the characteristic of artistic
research is ‘a specific perspective on already existing activities’ – a ‘new perspective [which]
in the longer run [will] have consequences for the direction of the development of art.’
And of academia, I would like to add.

156

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 157

In other words, as well as generating new or innovative art, the research
is conducted in and through the making of art. The boundary between
applied research in the arts and artistic research is thin and rather artificial, just as the dividing line between artistic reThe Dutch cartoon characters
search and performance studies or ethnography Fokke & Sukke, examining an
may also seem contrived. In the practice of artists, experiment in a laboratory setor even in their training, such a distinction is not ting: ‘… very impressive, colleague … but does it also work
always useful; the reality is more like a continuum in theory?’
I am also alluding here to Imthat provides leeway for a variety of research
strategies. But as argued above, methodological manuel Kant’s 1793 essay On the
Old Saw: That May Be Right in
pluralism is merely complementary to the prin- Theory but It Won’t Work in
ciple that artistic research takes place in and Practice (Ueber den Gemeinthrough the creation of art. For conceptual clar- spruch: Das mag in der Theorie
richtig sein, taugt aber nicht für
ity, I would argue in this case that what some- die Praxis) (Kant 1974 [1793]).
times does not hold true in practice may still be
useful in theory.
Especially in the world of design and architecture, the methodological framework of applied research seems suitable. Many of the
training programmes in these fields have strong ties to technical universities, or are even part of them. At first sight, it would seem that
one must choose: either an orientation to art or to science, engineering, or technology. In practice, though, most design academies and architecture schools aspire to a fruitful combination. ‘Research by design’ is the peer of artistic research; there, too, the debate is still
underway about the methodological and epistemological foundations of the research.12
An artistic experiment in a studio or atelier cannot simply be
equated with a controlled experiment in a laboratory. Nonetheless, in
many artistic research studies we can discern an affinity with fields like
engineering and technology that use methods and techniques with origins in scientific research. In that case, the empirical cycle of observation, theory and hypothesis development, prediction and testing, and
the model of the controlled experiment serve as an ideal type in the of12. See, for example, the discussions about research by design on the PhD-Design mailing list (PhD-Design n.d.).

157

The Production of Knowledge in Artistic Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 158

ten haphazard context of artistic discovery (just as such principles are
often applied in empirical social science research as well). Values inherent in scientific justification – including reliability, validity, replicability, and falsifiability – are also relevant in artistic research when it
is inspired by the science model.
When artistic research has technological or scientific attributes,
collaboration between artists and scientists seems only natural, since
artists, as a rule, have not been trained to do those types of research.
Bringing together expertise from these two worlds can lead to innovative findings and inspiring insights. Collaboration between artists and
other researchers does not, however, confine itself to areas like technology, engineering, and product design. Research in other fields may
also serve art practice or form productive ties with art. Consider the cooperation between artists and philosophers, anthropologists, or psychologists, as well as economists and legal theorists; projects involving
artists are also conducted in areas such as the life sciences, artificial intelligence, and information technology.13
Roughly speaking, multidisciplinary cooperation between artists
and scientists can take two different forms: either the scientific research
serves or illuminates the art; or the art serves or
Here the artist is an ‘outsider’,
illuminates what is going on in the science. Cur‘visitor’, or ‘participant’ in scienrently there is great interest in the latter mode in
tific practice. See Kitty Zijlmans, Robert Zwijnenberg, and
particular. The assumption is that the arts will be
Krien Clevis (eds), co-ops: Exable to elucidate, in their own unique ways, the
ploring New Territories in Art
and Science, 2007; and cf. my
procedures, results, and implications of scientific
remark in the Introduction to
research. BioArt can exemplify this; this art form,
the present volume, page 3.
whereby artists make use of biotechnological procedures like tissue and genetic engineering, leans
heavily on scientific research, while often training a critical light on the
ethical and social implications of research in the life sciences.
In the debate on research in the arts, these and other kinds of artand-science collaboration are often wrongly classed together with artistic research as explored in this chapter. Although the term ‘art-and-science’ may imply convergence at first glance, if anything it represents a
13. For a detailed review, see Wilson 2002.

158

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 159

reinstatement of the partition between the domain of art and the domain of science, between the artistic and the academic, between what
artists do and what scientists do. There is nothing wrong with that, of
course; it can only be applauded that these oft-segregated spheres and
cultures are now meeting each other in projects where people learn from
one another and where critical confrontations can take place. Yet multidisciplinary research projects like these must still be understood as collaboration between different disciplines around a particular topic,
whereby the theoretical premises and working methods of the separate
disciplines remain intact. The scientist does her thing, and the artist does
hers. Even if the artist borrows right and left from the scientist, the aesthetic evaluation of the material, the artistic decisions made in creating
the artwork, and the manner in which the results are presented and documented are still, as a rule, discipline-specific. Only very rarely does such
multidisciplinary research result in any real hybridisation of domains.
Whilst artistic research is not entirely at odds with these types of
art-science collaboration, it should still be regarded as an academic research form of its own. The science model cannot be a benchmark here,
any more than artistic research could conform to the standards of the
humanities.

Artistic research as academic research
Even if one accepts that artworks somehow embody forms of knowledge or criticism, and that such knowledge and criticism is enacted in
artistic practices and creative processes, and also that the knowledge and
criticism is embedded in the wider context of the art world and academia, then that still does not mean that what artists do may be construed as ‘research’ in the emphatic sense. ‘Research’ is ‘owned’ by science; it is performed by people who have mastered ‘the scientific
method’, in institutions dedicated to the systematic accumulation of
knowledge and its application, such as universities and industrial or governmental research centres.
It is indeed the case that ‘what artists do’ cannot automatically
be called research. In the debate about artistic research, the discussions
often turn on the distinction between art practice in itself and art practice as research [cf. chapter 2 above]. Few would contend that each work

159

The Production of Knowledge in Artistic Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 160

of art or every artistic practice is an outcome of research in the emphatic
sense of the word. I shall confine myself here to the question of which
criteria must be satisfied if artistic research is to qualify as academic research. I will show that artistic research incorporates both the interests
of practice and those of academia.14
In the world of academia, there is broad
See also chapter 4, pages 79-80.
agreement as to what should be understood by research. Briefly it amounts to the following. Research takes place when a person intends to carry out an original study
to enhance knowledge and understanding. It begins with questions or
issues that are relevant in the research context, and it employs methods that are appropriate to the research and which ensure the validity
and reliability of the research findings. An additional requirement is that
the research process and the research findings be documented and disseminated in appropriate ways.
This description of academic research leaves room for a great diversity of research programmes and strategies, whether deriving from
technology and natural science, social sciences, or the humanities, and
whether aiming at a basic understanding of what is studied or a more
practical application of the knowledge obtained. Artistic research also
falls within this characterisation of academic research. Let us focus more
closely on the various components of this description.15
14. See Biggs and Büchler 2008, who argue for a balance between academic values and
artistic values. To strongly simplify the matter, I would suggest that academic values have
dominated in the British discourse thus far, whilst on the European continent the emphasis has lain more on artistic values. In their analysis of values, demonstrated through actions that are meaningful and potentially significant, in relation to the two communities
(practice and academia), Biggs and Büchler appear to hold ‘artistic practice’ and ‘academic
research’ constant, whereas in fact our notions of what both artistic practice and academic
research are become enriched under the emerging ‘paradigm’ of artistic research.
15. An ontological, epistemological, and methodological exploration of artistic research
[in chapter 2 above] culminated in the following definition: ‘Art practice qualifies as research if its purpose is to expand our knowledge and understanding by conducting an
original investigation in and through art objects and creative processes. Art research begins by addressing questions that are pertinent in the research context and in the art
world. Researchers employ experimental and hermeneutic methods that reveal and articulate the tacit knowledge that is situated and embodied in specific artworks and artistic
processes. Research processes and outcomes are documented and disseminated in an appropriate manner to the research community and the wider public.’

160

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 161

Intent
The research is undertaken for the purpose of broadening and deepening our knowledge and understanding of the discipline or disciplines
in question. Artistic practices contribute first of all to the art world, the
artistic universe. The production of images, installations, compositions,
and performances as such is not intended primarily for enhancing our
knowledge (although forms of reflection are always entwined with
art). This points to an important distinction between art practice in itself and artistic research. Artistic research seeks in and through the production of art to contribute not just to the artistic universe, but to what
we ‘know’ and ‘understand’. In so doing, it goes beyond the artistic universe in two ways. First, the results of the research extend further than
the personal artistic development of the artist in question. In cases
where the impact of research remains confined to the artist’s own oeuvre and has no significance for the wider research context, one can justifiably ask whether this qualifies as research in the true sense of the
word. Second, the research is expressly intended to shift the frontiers of
the discipline. Just as the contribution made by other academic research consists in uncovering new facts or relationships, or shedding new
light on existing facts or relationships, artistic research likewise helps expand the frontiers of the discipline by developing cutting-edge artistic
practices, products, and insights. In a material
This refers to the dual context
sense, then, the research impacts on the develop- discussed on page 165 below.
ment of art practice, and in a cognitive sense on
our understanding of what that art practice is.
Originality
Artistic research entails original contributions – that is, the work should
not have previously been carried out by others, and it should add new
knowledge or understandings to the existing corpus. Here, too, we must
distinguish between an original contribution to art practice and an original contribution to what we know and underThis criterion will later be eased
stand – between artistic and academic originality. during my discussion of the reYet artistic and academic originality are closely re- view guidelines for the Journal
lated. As a rule, an original contribution in artis- for Artistic Research (in chapter
11, pages 233-35).
tic research will result in an original work of art,

161

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 162

as the relevance of the artistic outcome is one test of the adequacy of
the research.16 The reverse is not true, however; an original artwork is
not necessarily an outcome of research in the emphatic sense. In the
concrete practice of artistic research, one must determine case by case
in what way and in what measure the research has resulted in original
artistic and academic outcomes.17 In any research study that pretends
to make a difference, it is important to realise that it is hard to determine at the outset whether it will ultimately result in an original contribution. It is an inherent quality of research that ‘one does not know
exactly what one does not know’.18 Consequently,
Rheinberger’s insights (footnote
guiding intuitions and chance inspirations are
18) will be discussed in relation
just as important for the motivation and dyto artistic research in chapter 9.
namism of research as methodological prescriptions and discursive justifications. Contributing
new knowledge to what already exists is characteristic of the open-ended
nature of every research study.
Knowledge and understanding
If artistic research is an ‘original investigation undertaken in order to
gain knowledge and understanding’,19 then the question arises as to
what kinds of knowledge and understanding this involves. Traditionally, the central focus of epistemology is on propositional knowledge – knowledge of facts, knowledge about the world, knowing that
such and such is the case. This can be distinguished from knowledge
as skill – knowing how to make, how to act, how to perform. A third
16. This is mainly a theoretical distinction to help clarify the principle of originality. As
with other demarcations and dichotomies, it needs to be interpreted freely in the light of
the diversity of practice. It is important to avoid any overly close association with the early
Romantic originality principle as held by the eighteenth-century aesthetics of genius,
which still haunts in the minds of many as a sort of implicit paradigm.
17. See Pakes 2003 for a more detailed critical analysis of the originality principle in artistic research.
18. Rheinberger 2007. The full quote is: ‘Das Grundproblem besteht darin, dass man nicht
genau weiss, was man nicht weiss. Damit ist das Wesen der Forschung kurz, aber bündig ausgesprochen.’ (‘The basic problem is that one does not know exactly what one does not know.
Put succinctly, that is the essence of research’ (my translation)). Cf. also Dallow 2003: 49, 56.
19. This is the wording used by the Research Assessment Exercise in the UK; for the full
rae definition of research, see rae 2005: 34.

162

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 163

form of knowledge may be described as acquaintance: familiarity
and receptiveness with respect to persons, conditions, or situations –
‘I know this person’, ‘I know that situation’. In the history of epistemology, these types of knowledge have been thematised in a variety
of ways, ranging from Aristotle’s distinction between theoretical
knowledge, practical knowledge, and wisdom to Polanyi’s (1958) contrast between focal and tacit knowledge. Different notions exist as to
the relationships between the three types of knowledge – notions
which are also identifiable in the debate about artistic research. Sometimes the emphasis lies on propositional knowledge, sometimes on
knowledge as skill, and sometimes on ‘understanding’ as a form of
knowledge in which theoretical knowledge, practical knowledge, and
acquaintance may intersect.
In the case of artistic research, we can add to the knowledge and
understanding duo the synonyms ‘insight’ and ‘comprehension’, in order to emphasise that a perceptive, receptive, and verstehende engagement
with the subject matter is often more important to the research than getting an ‘explanatory grip’. Such an investigation
The Norwegian fellowship proalso seeks to enhance our experience, in the rich gramme requires, in addition to
sense of the word ‘experience’: the knowledge and critical reflection on the research
skills accumulated through action and practice, process and its outcomes, that
‘the work [of art] must conplus apprehension through the senses. In the de- tribute to new insight, knowlbate on the status of the experiential component edge and/or experience’.
of artistic research, disagreement exists as to
whether this component is non-conceptual, and
therefore non-discursive, or whether it is a cogniThis expression from Wilfrid
tive component that definitely resides in the ‘space Sellars is used by John Mcof reasons’ (cf. Biggs 2004). The dispute between Dowell (see page 170 below).
epistemological foundationalism and coherentism,
which mainly concerns propositional knowledge,
does not figure at all in the debate about artistic research. Many observers,
though, do not view knowledge primarily as ‘justified true belief’ or ‘warranted assertibility’, but as a form of world disclosure (a hermeneutic perspective) or world constitution (a constructivist
Constructivist realism
perspective). I shall return to these epistemological questions in the final section below.

163

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 164

Questions, issues, problems
The requirement that a research study should set out with well-defined
questions, topics, or problems is often at odds with the actual course
of events in artistic research. Formulating a question implies delimiting the space in which a possible answer may be found. Yet research
(and not only artistic research) often resembles an uncertain quest in
which the questions or topics only materialise during the journey, and
may often change as well. Besides not knowing exactly what one does
not know, one also does not know how to delimit the space where potential answers are located. As a rule, artistic research is not hypothesis-led, but discovery-led (Rubidge 2005: 8), whereby the artist undertakes a search on the basis of intuition, guesses, and hunches, and
possibly stumbles across some unexpected issues or surprising questions
on the way.
In the light of the actual dynamics of current academic research,
the prevailing format for research design (such as that required in
funding applications) is basically inadequate. EsI am fully aware that we have to
pecially in artistic research – and entirely in line
live with this inadequacy. In the
with the creative process – the artist’s tacit unpractice of research training it is
useful to learn to formulate rederstandings and her accumulated experience,
search questions.
expertise, and sensitivity in exploring uncharted
territory are more crucial in identifying challenges and solutions than an ability to delimit the study and put research questions into words at an early stage. The latter can be more a
burden than a boon.
As we have seen, research studies done in and through art may
be oriented to science and technology or more to interpretation and
social criticism, and they may avail themselves of a diversity of
methodological instruments. By the same token, the topics and questions addressed by the research can vary from those focusing purely
on the artistic material or the creative process to those that touch on
other life domains or even have their locus and their telos there. The
subject matter of the research is enclosed, as it were, in the artistic material, or in the creative process, or in the transdisciplinary space that
connects the artistic practices to meaningful contexts. The research,
then, seeks to explore the often non-conceptual content that is em-

164

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 165

bodied in art, enacted in the creative process, or embedded in the
transdisciplinary context.
Context
Contexts are constitutive factors in both art practice and artistic research. Artistic practices do not stand on their own; they are always situated and embedded. Artworks and artistic actions acquire their meaning in interchange with relevant environments. Research in the arts will
remain naive unless it acknowledges and confronts this embeddedness
and situatedness in history, in culture (society, economy, everyday
life), as well as in the discourse on art; herein lies the merit of relational
aesthetics and of all constructivist approaches in artistic research.
Contexts figure in artistic research in another way too. The relevance and urgency of the research questions and
To emphasise the equilibrium
topics is determined in part within the research between these two contexts,
context, where the intersubjective forum of peers I would now phrase it more
defines the state of the art. This formally invested, adequately:
‘… what potential contribuor abstractly internalised, normative forum assesses tion the research will make to
what potential contribution the research will make the art world and to the current
to the current body of knowledge and under- body of knowledge and understanding …’
standing, and in what relationship the research
‘… justify its own potential
stands to other research in the area. Every artistic to the academic forum and the
research study must justify its own importance to art forum, which look over the
researcher’s shoulder …’
the academic forum, which, like the artistic forum,
looks over the researcher’s shoulder, as it were.
Methods
I have commented above on the distinctive nature of artistic research
in terms of methodology. This is characterised by the use, within the
research process, of art practice, artistic actions, creation, and performance. Experimental art practice is integral to the research, just as
the active involvement of the artist is an essential component of the research strategy. Here lies the similarity of artistic research to both laboratory-based technical research and ethnographic field study. The erratic nature of creative discovery – of which unsystematic drifting,
serendipity, chance inspirations, and clues form an integral part – is

165

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 166

such that a methodological justification is not easy to codify. Just as in
many other academic research studies, it involves doing unpredictable
things, and this implies intuition and some measure of randomness. Research is more like exploration than like following a firm path.20
Much artistic research does not limit itself to an investigation into
material aspects of art or an exploration of the creative process, but pretends to reach further in the transdisciplinary context. Experimental
and interpretive research strategies thus transect one another here in an
undertaking whose purpose is to articulate the connectedness of art to
who we are and where we stand. Much of today’s visual and performing art is critically engaged with other life domains, such as gender,
globalisation, identity, environment, or activism; philosophical or psychological issues might be addressed in artistic research projects as well.
The difference between artistic research and social or political science,
critical theory, or cultural analysis lies in the central place which art practice occupies in both the research process and the research outcome.
This makes research in the arts distinct from that in other academic disciplines engaging with the same issues. In assessing the research, it is
important to keep in mind that the specific contribution it makes to
our knowledge, understanding, insight, and experience lies in the ways
these issues are articulated, expressed, and communicated through art.
Documentation, dissemination
The academic requirement that the research process and the research findings be documented and disseminated in appropriate ways raises a number of questions when it comes to artistic research. What does ‘appropriate’
mean here? What kinds of documentation would do justice to research
that is guided by an intuitive creative process and by tacit understandings?
What value does a rational reconstruction have if it is far removed from
the actual, often erratic course taken by the research? What are the best
ways to report non-conceptual artistic findings? And what is the relationship between the artistic and the discursive, between what is presented
and displayed and what is described? What audience does the research
want to target, and what impact does it hope to achieve? And which com20. Theoretical physicist Robbert Dijkgraaf (2007: 31) in an interview.

166

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 167

munication channels are best-suited for putting the research results into
the limelight? Questions like these have been the subject of ongoing discussion for the past fifteen years in the debate on practice-based research
in the creative and performing arts and design – not least in the context
of academic degree programmes and funding schemes, which demand
clear answers in their admission and assessment procedures.
Because artistic research addresses itself both to the academic forum and to the forum of the arts, the research documentation, as well
as the presentation and dissemination of the findings, needs to conform
to the prevailing standards in both forums. UsuThe founding of the Journal for
ally, though, a double-blind reviewed academic Artistic Research is one response
journal will not be the most appropriate publica- to this issue.
tion medium; the material and discursive outcomes of the research will be directed first of all to
the art world and the art discourse, one that extends beyond academia.
But a discursive justification of the research will be necessary with the
academic discourse in mind, while the artistic findings will have to convince the art world as well. Even so, the discursive space of reasons need
not remain confined to that of traditional scholarly writings. The artist
can also use other, perhaps innovative forms of discursivity that stand
closer to the artistic work than a written text, such as an artistic portfolio that maps the line of artistic reasoning, or argumentations coded in
scores, scripts, videos, or diagrams. What matters most is the cogency of
the documentation with respect to both intersubjective forums. For all
that, language does remain a highly functional complementary medium
to help get across to others what is at issue in the research – provided one
keeps in mind that there will always be a gap between what is displayed
and what is put into words. Or more precisely:
Ludwig Wittgenstein (1958: §43)
given that the meaning of words often remains in Philosophical Investigations:
limited to their use in the language, a certain mod- ‘The meaning of a word is its
esty is due here in view of the performative power use in the language.’
of the material outcomes.21
21. Language-based creative practice (poetry, prose) is a challenge in this respect. Here the
performative power of the art is intermingled with and indissolubly connected to the play
with the meaning of the words.

167

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 168

The written, verbal, or discursive component that accompanies
the material research outcome may go in three directions.22 Many people place emphasis on a rational reconstruction of the research process,
clarifying how the results were achieved. Others use language to provide
interpretive access to the findings – the material products and the practices generated by the research. A third possibility is to express something
in and with language which can be understood as a ‘verbalisation’ or
‘conceptual mimesis’ of the artistic outcome. The concepts, thoughts,
and utterances ‘assemble themselves’ around the artwork, so that the artwork begins to speak.23 In contrast to an interpretation of the artistic
work or a reconstruction of the artistic process, the latter option involves
an emulation or imitation of, or an allusion to, the non-conceptual content embodied in the art.

Some remarks on the epistemology and
metaphysics of artistic research:
Non-conceptualism, realism, contingency
Non-conceptualism
To begin this final section of the chapter, I return to the provisional description of artistic research I proposed at the beginning. Artistic research – as embedded in artistic and academic contexts – is the articulation of the unreflective, non-conceptual content enclosed in aesthetic
experiences, enacted in creative practices, and embodied in artistic products. The theme of unreflective action, non-conceptual content, and
embodied knowledge is explored in phenomenology, which, starting
with Husserl and continuing via Heidegger and Merleau-Ponty, has focused attention on the nature of perception and the constitution of intentionality and normativity, beyond an ontology in which the world
was thought to be independent of our situatedness.
In the work of Maurice Merleau-Ponty, embodied knowledge is
22. I decline to discuss here any numerical ratio of the verbal to the material. Any general
prescription of the number of words to be required for an artistic PhD does no justice to
the subject. An adequate and suitable relationship between the two needs to be determined separately for each artistic research project.
23. Cf. note 10 in this chapter.

168

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 169

also concretely ‘bodily knowledge’. The a priori of the body assumes the
place of the a priori of intellectual knowledge, making the pre-reflective bodily intimacy with the world around us into the foundation of
our thinking and acting. By virtue of our bodily constitution and our
bodily situatedness in the world, we are capable of ‘getting a grip on reality’ as we observe, learn, and act, and of ‘acting in flow’ prior to any
reflection and without following rules.24 Conversely, pre-reflective
knowledge and understanding already lie enclosed in how we understand and engage with reality.25 That is why the world is familiar to us,
even before we gain access to it via concepts and language.
Part of the significance and singularity of artistic research seems
to lie in its appraisal and articulation of this pre-reflective knowledge
as embodied in art practices and products. Some
It would be beyond the scope of
argue that artistic research targets these non-con- this book to delve more deeply
ceptual forms of knowledge and understanding, into the phenomenological trawhich emerge in and through the creation of art, dition, its impact on the cognitive sciences, and the criticisms
without wanting or being able to explicate them that might be made of it.
further. Others feel that it seeks to give explicit
discursive (that is, verbal) expression to the
knowledge that is embodied and enacted in works and practices of art.
If the artistic research programme were to confine itself solely to
explicating this non-propositional knowledge, it would, as a consequence of its epistemological gaze, risk losing the research object along
the way. It would risk shrinking the programme into a sort of decoding exercise, rendering it doubtful whether the research would even be
useful at all to art practice and our understanding of it. After all, the
dynamic of art practice seems to be inseparably bound to its categori24. In the current debate, key Merleau-Pontian notions as ‘maximum grip’, ‘intentional
arc’, or ‘motor intentionality’ play an important part. Merleau-Ponty’s insights have had
strong influence in theatre studies, particularly dance studies; see e.g. Parviainen 2002.
But the voices of poststructuralist and neo-Marxist critiques of phenomenology can also
be heard in the debate on artistic research. The pre-reflective engagement with the world
is a theme often encountered in the writings of philosophers influenced by Wittgenstein’s
‘rule-following considerations’.
25. Charles Taylor (2005: 34), in discussing the importance of the phenomenological heritage for contemporary philosophy of mind, speaks in this connection of ‘pre-understanding’.

169

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 170

cal je ne sais quoi; secrets have a constitutive function both in the creative process and in the artistic outcome. For this reason, many observers argue for not making these secrets explicit at all, but for articulating and communicating them solely in and through the production
of art. Clearly the standpoint we adopt here will partly determine which
demands we put on the content and form of the documentation in contexts such as doctoral research in the arts.
The implicit, pre-reflective knowledge and understanding embodied and enacted in art practice is also at issue in that particular
strand of post-Heideggerian cognitive science that distances itself from
the predominant physicalism. A recent dialogue between Hubert Dreyfus (2005, 2007a, 2007b) and John McDowell (2007a, 2007b) has compellingly highlighted the core issue here: Does the phenomenological
account of our embodied coping skills and our immediate expert intuitive understanding (which are also pre-eminent issues in art practice)
point to an essentially non-conceptual, and hence non-discursive, content in research? Or is a smooth transition conceivable between pre-reflective forms of knowledge and experience and their linguistic-conceptual translation or conversion within the space of reasons?26
The same question re-emerges here which has been pivotal to the
debate on artistic research from the very outset. Is it possible to achieve
a linguistic-conceptual articulation of the embedded, enacted, and
embodied content of artistic research? The significance of the current
discussion at the intersection of phenomenology, cognitive sciences, and
philosophy of mind lies in the prospects it may open for liberating the
content of research in and through artistic practices from the explicit,
explanatory, descriptive, or interpretive approaches that are so common
in other research in the arts. Artistic research might just prove to be an
ideal sphere for testing the scope and fecundity of this contemporary
phenomenological research agenda. And conversely, artistic research
might benefit from the insights that the phenomenological agenda has
to offer.

26. See Rietveld 2008; cf. also the debate between Luntley (2003) and Säätelä (2005) on
aesthetic experiences and non-conceptual content.

170

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 171

Realism
A distinctive characteristic of artistic research is that it articulates both
our familiarity with the world and our distance from it. It owes this ability to a special quality of art practice, which at once elicits and evades
our epistemic stance. This Kantian theme links
‘Our natural relation to the
the programme of artistic research to the current world’s existence […] is closer,
broader interest in theories of knowledge and or more intimate, than the ideas
strategies of research which leave room for our of believing and knowing are
made to convey.’
implicit, tacit, non-conceptual, non-discursive ‘Our relation to the world as a
relations with the world and with ourselves. Artis- whole […] is not one of knowtic research articulates the fact that our natural re- ing.’
Stanley Cavell 1996: 25 and
lationship with things we encounter is more in- 1979: 45.
timate than what we can know. At the same time,
it also familiarises us with the fact that those
things are in some way foreign to us. In art, we
‘We want to understand somesense something of our pre-reflective intimacy thing that is already in plain
with the world, while realising simultaneously view. For this is what we seem in
that we will never explicitly understand what lies some sense not to understand.’
Ludwig Wittgenstein 1958: §89.
there in such plain view. When we listen to music, look at images, or identify with body movements, we are brought into touch with a reality that precedes any representation in the space of the conceptual. That is the abstractness of
all art, even after the long farewell to the aesthetics of early Romanticism. In a certain sense, this reality is more real, and nearer to us, than
the reality we try to approach with our epistemological projects. This
is the concreteness of all art, even in its most abstract forms and contents. In the critical and aesthetic distance to the world of representations that arises in the unfinished process of material thinking in and
through art, art invites us to think, ‘without the possibility of any definite thought whatever, i.e. concept, being adequate to it’.
Artistic research is the acceptance of that paradoxical invitation.
The artistic, pre-reflective, non-conceptual content enclosed in aesthetic experiences, embodied in artworks, and enacted in artistic practices is articulated, amplified, contextualised, and thought through in
the research. That content encompasses more than just the tacit
knowledge embodied in the skilfulness of artistic work. This ‘more’ is

171

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 172

the ability of art – deliberately articulated in
artistic research – to impart and evoke fundamental ideas and perspectives that disclose the
world for us and, at the same time, render that world into what it is
or can be. If some form of mimesis does exist in art, it is here: in the
force – at once performative and perspectivist – by which art offers us
new experiences, outlooks, and insights that bear on our relationship
to the world and to ourselves. Artistic research concerns and affects the
foundations of our perception, our understanding, our relationship to
the world and to other people, as well as our perspective on what is or
should be. This articulation of the world we live in is what we may call
the realism of artistic research.

Constructivist realism

Contingency
The non-conceptual content that is addressed in artistic research is by
nature undefined. Although it is materially anchored (in a broad sense
of the word ‘material’), it simultaneously transcends the materiality of
the medium. Here lies not only the je ne sais quoi of the aesthetic experience, but also a call to reflection. Artistic research provides room
for a multidimensional unfolding of this undefined content – in and
through creating and performing, in and through discursive approaches,
revelations, or paraphrasings, in and through criticism encountered in
the artistic and academic research environment.
At least two perspectives can be adopted on
Constructivist realism
what artistic research has to offer: a constructivist
and a hermeneutic perspective. The constructivist
perspective holds that objects and events actually become constituted in
and through artworks and artistic actions. Only in and through art do
we see what landscapes, soundworlds, histories, emotions, relations, interests, or movements really are or could be. Here lies the performative
and critical power of art. It does not represent things; it presents them,
thereby making the world into what it is or could be. The hermeneutic perspective assumes that artistic practices and artworks disclose the
world to us. The world-revealing power of art lies in its ability to offer
us those new vistas, experiences, and insights that affect our relationship
with the world and with ourselves. Artistic research addresses this

172

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 173

world-constituting and world-revealing power of art – the ways in
which we constitute and understand the world in and through art.
The fundamentally non-conceptual nature of this act of constitution and revelation – which comes before any theoretical reflection
about the world – is what enables art to set our thinking into motion,
inviting us to unfinished reflection. Artistic research is the deliberate
articulation of such unfinished thinking. It reinforces the contingent
perspectives and world disclosures which art imparts. Artistic research
therefore does not really involve theory building or knowledge production in the usual sense of those terms. Its primary importance lies
not in explicating the implicit or non-implicit knowledge enclosed in
art. It is more directed at a not-knowing, or a not-yet-knowing. It creates room for that which is unthought, that which
This points ahead to chapter 9,
is unexpected – the idea that all things could be where I discuss this as the ‘epidifferent. Especially pertinent to artistic research stemic thing’ in artistic research.
is the realisation that we do not yet know what we
don’t know. Art invites us and allows us to linger
at the frontier of what there is, and it gives us an outlook on what might
be. Artistic research is the deliberate articulation of these contingent perspectives.

173

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 174

Chapter 8

Boundary
Work: An
Interview

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 175

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 176

Context
This interview, conducted by Michael Schwab, postconceptual artist and philosopher at the Royal College
of Art, London, took place in Brussels on 16 November
2010, at a time when I was beginning to study the theoretical work of the historian of science Hans-Jörg Rheinberger (chapter 9). I explicitly qualify here some earlier
distinctions I made between ontology and epistemology
and between artistic facts and other types of facts. This
brought me increasingly closer to the constructivist realism that I had begun to value in actor-network theory.

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 177

In a recent text in the Zurich Yearbook of the Arts [chapter 6 above] you
mention the concept of ‘boundary work’ in relation to artistic research.
Could I ask you to expand on your ideas?
I took the concept from Thomas F. Gieryn (1983). I did not study his
work in detail and just stumbled across the concept of ‘boundary object’, which is the term he actually uses. I use ‘boundary work’ in the article to highlight the negotiations that are required along boundaries,
but I think the more challenging concept is ‘boundary object’, which
is an object that changes its ontological and epistemological nature depending on the context in which it is used. This is especially interesting along the borderlines between different disciplines, within academia,
for instance. ‘Boundary object’ means that an object has some meaning in a certain research environment and another meaning in another
research environment. Moreover, in the sociology of science, where the
concept is used, it also has a role to play between academic disciplines
per se and fields outside academia. This is interesting for artistic research,
because artistic research places itself on the border between academia and
the art world. As a consequence, artistic research as boundary work has
two contexts: one context is academia, meaning that artistic research has
to acknowledge that it is part of academia and its ways of doing; the
other context is the art world, where artistic research has to be relevant
for things that happen within the ‘real world’ outside.
Taking this into account, what impact does a concept such as ‘boundary
work’ have on artistic research as a discipline? Is artistic research a discipline;
or rather, can it be a discipline if it operates with ‘boundary objects’?
The notion of ‘discipline’ has become contested not only in the case of
artistic research but also in other areas of contemporary research. When
you ask a question about ‘disciplines’, you are really enquiring about traditional disciplinary academic research, whereas a lot of advanced academic research nowadays challenges the notion of ‘discipline’ – it is postdisciplinary or transdisciplinary research. Artistic research is better
understood as something that represents this kind of border violation,
rather than being a new discipline alongside other art-related disciplines.

177

Boundary Work: An Interview

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 178

Part of the notion of ‘discipline’ is the way in which it safeguards its borders through, for example, reviewing processes or the adherence to certain
modes of writing. Is such safeguarding also challenged through the advanced
concept of ‘boundary work’?
There is a misunderstanding here. When I say that artistic research is not
a discipline in the usual sense of the word, I am referring to the old concept of scientific research as organised in specific
I made this statement at a time
scientific disciplines, which is not the case with
when we were just devising such
artistic research. This does not mean that it is not
an approach. Schwab and I were
in Brussels for an editorial board
disciplined – that there is no quality assurance or
meeting of the future Journal for
refereeing process – although no one at the moArtistic Research. The trial issue
later appeared in March 2011,
ment knows how to do that in the best possible
and the first peer–reviewed issue
way. I am just referring negatively to the old conin November of the same year
cept of what is called Mode 1 science, which is dis(see chapter 11).
ciplined and organised in a homogeneous way.
Chemistry laboratories in Helsinki or Barcelona,
for example, all look the same, and the quality of their research is exclusively assessed by disciplinary peers (that is, academics). This is not
at all the case in artistic research: it is more heterogeneously organised,
more diversified, with a form of extended peer review – which in our case
means that both academics and artists judge the quality and the direction of the research, and even the research agenda at large. This character makes it an example of ‘Mode 2 knowledge production’, although I
will not say that artistic research is the example of Mode 2 knowledge production (I have written extensively about this elsewhere [in chapter 4
above]). There are all kinds of problems attached to that. To answer your
question briefly: yes, it is not a discipline in the usual sense of traditional,
disciplinary academic research; but academic customs, like quality assurance through a refereeing process, are still in place.
Can boundary works be reviewed in the same way as other types of objects?
Normally, when you are reviewing something, doesn’t it have to have some
form of identity? In other words, is there not a potential methodological
problem when reviewing processes refer to a shifting object, so that the way
you would talk about it has to adapt in some form or other?

178

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 179

I don’t think so. The fact that the object is floating, or not a real object
at all if looked at on closer inspection, is not a problem within academia. Not even the different perspective (for instance from the artist’s side)
towards the same phenomenon – as compared to
We are so accustomed to makan academic looking at the same object – creates ing a distinction between artists
a problem. Once an object is approached in order and academics, between art and
to review its research quality, it is already inscribed science, that we find it hard to
think any differently. Yet both
in academic discourse, making no difference these spheres transform (Lawhether the reviewer is an artist or not. The whole tour) as the network of artistic
point is rather that the borderline between artists research develops. The point is
not to do away with the dualand researchers is being blurred. The moment ism altogether, but to underyou are refereeing or judging the quality of an art- stand both of these spheres in a
work as research, you brand it within academic new way.
discourse. However, there are two other things I
want to stress that relate to the concept of ‘artistic research’ as boundary work. Artistic research is a good example of a
form of academic research in which the context is not just the disciplinary environment of university-based research. The outside world, in this
case the art world, plays a central role in formulating the research
agenda, formulating the direction the research has to take, evaluating the
outcomes of the research, and assessing the quality of the research.
Thus, artistic research has two contexts, and that makes artistic research
a very good example of modern contemporary academic research, where
more and more people realise that the quality of academic research is not
assessed only within the boundaries of university institutions.
The second aspect has to do with the blurring of art and other life
domains. The text I published in Zurich has to do with the boundaries
of what art is and what the realm of knowledge and research is, and also
what art is in comparison to our moral stance or to issues of daily life.
I think that artistic research is an opportunity to address specifically the
interrelationship between what is at stake within art and other domains of life. In artistic research projects, things are articulated that bear
on who we are, where we stand, what our relation is to other people and
the environment. In that sense, artistic research is also transdisciplinary
research, because it reaches out to the wider community, making it a
good example of what people call Mode 2 knowledge production.

179

Boundary Work: An Interview

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 180

When you say that the ‘boundary work’ is not a real but a floating object,
what are the implications in relation to the work’s materiality? Are there
particular modes that bring out the ‘boundary work’? How can a ‘boundary work’ appear, and how might it be threatened?
The starting point is: there is no work – at least not in a strict ontological sense. Artworks become concrete only in specific settings, contexts. Artworks and artistic actions acquire their status and meaning in
interchange with relevant environments. The art world is one such environment; academia is another. It all depends on what you are looking for. The research context might invite us to identify a work as ‘work’,
either material or immaterial. Again, it all depends on the issues addressed, the questions raised, and the methods used. There are no particular modes that bring out the ‘boundary work’, but the ‘research
mode’ will bring out the work on this side of the boundary; the ‘market mode’, for instance, on the other.
There are two aspects I am interested in when it comes to artistic research
and the question of boundary work. One aspect is the discipline – it
sounds very much like artistic research is a transdisciplinary exercise that
transgresses all possible disciplines; the other aspect is that the boundary work
as you describe it might equally lack identity, and that only by pragmatically accepting provisional identities such as ‘artworks’ can we even talk
about it. Does a ‘boundary work’ – in spite of its floating or shifting character – have a stable identity that functions as a point of reference within
different contexts; or are there more complex ontological consequences to be
drawn from the concept of ‘boundary works’?
The distinction I make in the essay ‘The Debate on Research in the
Arts’ [chapter 2 above] between an ontological, an epistemological, and
a methodological question served a mere heuristic aim: to differentiate between different aspects of research in the arts, which one might
encounter in this emerging research field. In fact, there is no such a
thing as an ‘ontology of artistic research’ independent of its epistemology and methodology. Identifying a research object is always at the
same time an epistemic act – that is, knowing at least roughly the kind

180

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 181

of knowledge the object might convey or embody – and a methodological act – that is, knowing how to get access to the knowledge the object is said to convey or embody.
In your question you refer to ‘a boundary work’, thereby already
more or less objectifying the ‘object’ of research. In my essay ‘Artistic Research as Boundary Work’ [chapter 6 above], I
This active use of ‘work’ correemphasise the more active use of the term: the sponds to the interpretation of
work to be done, both on the border of art and ac- academia as continually evolvademia and on the border of art research and other ing, as ‘science in action’ (Latour).
life domains. Precisely because no sharp boundaries can be drawn between art on one side and academia and other spheres of life on the other, research in art has to acknowledge that its ‘objects’ are fuzzy, preliminary, contingent on the
project at hand. One might say that the epistemological core of the artistic research programme is empty, or [more accurately] crowded and heterogeneous – terms used by Helga Nowotny, Peter Scott, and Michael
Gibbons (2001: 179) to describe the new production of knowledge – and
that it is dependent on the specific perspective or the ‘implication’ of the
research project. This fuzzy epistemology of artistic research is in line with
recent investigations into the history and epistemology of science. HansJörg Rheinberger’s notion of an ‘epistemic thing’ tries to capture something of the contingency inherent to research in science:
As long as epistemic objects and their concepts remain blurred,
they generate a productive tension: they reach out into the unknown and as a result they become research tools. I call this tension ‘contained excess’. François Jacob speaks of a ‘play of possibilities’. (Rheinberger 2010: 156).
The artistic research programme is a case in point where we acknowledge from the start that the research ‘object’ or ‘issue’ does not have a
fixed identity – which invites, in principle, unfinished thinking. Especially due to the non-conceptual content of artistic research – the fact
that what is at stake here can only partially be ‘captured’ discursively –
it evades any definitive epistemological ‘grip’, while at the same time
opening up a possible perspective on what we do not yet know. ‘Artis-

181

Boundary Work: An Interview

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 182

Together with Latour’s sociology
of science, Rheinberger’s epistemology lent support both to
artistic research as an undertaking and to my contribution to
and explanation of this undertaking.

tic things’ are epistemic things par excellence;
they create room for that which is unthought. In
‘The Debate on Research in the Arts’ [chapter 2]
I made a distinction between scientific facts, social facts, historical facts, and artistic facts in order to highlight the sui generis nature of the object of research in the arts. As with the distinction between ontology,
epistemology, and methodology, I would now like to play down that
distinction. There are no such things as basic artistic facts on which the
edifice of the artistic is build. The realm of the artistic is historically and
systematically contingent on where and how it is constituted. Here we
can learn something from science and technology studies, for instance
from actor-network theory, where the artistic realm is a network and
something that is performed through the active involvement of its actors, both human and non-human. To paraphrase Bruno Latour: the
artistic research programme is a programme to ‘reassemble the artistic’,
which in itself is an unfinished project.
If the ‘artistic’ is a project-to-come, what are the characteristics of ‘artistic
research’ that make it different from other forms of research?

When it comes to discriminating or demarcating artistic research from
other advanced Mode 2 forms for knowledge production, I would simply say that there are two features that are characteristic of artistic research
when compared to other approaches. Firstly, there are methodological prescriptions; and you could say that artistic research takes place in and
through the making of art, making it distinct from, for instance, humanities research into the same issues. Secondly, there is the outcome of
artistic research, which, partly at least, is art. I say ‘partly’, because people differ in opinion about the extents to which discursive aspects may be
added to the artistic outcome. For sure, if there is no concrete practice or
artwork as a part of the outcome of an artistic research project, then in
my opinion it could not count as artistic research. Here we have two negative criteria which distinguish artistic research from other advanced
forms of knowledge production that might address the same issues: one
is that the research is done in and through creating or performing; and

182

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 183

the other is that the outcomes of artistic research are partly also concrete
artistic products – artefacts, installations, compositions, and so on.
In this case, would you not worry about the potential impact of art market structures – that is, what is counted as art or artwork in the market –
on artistic research? Does artistic research not have to buy into limited forms
of artmaking then, whilst the more advanced or more ephemeral practices
(which might not necessarily produce a work or anything identifiable as
such) would actually be disadvantaged? Would we not rather expect the opposite; namely, that artistic research, if anything, would mount a challenge
against any traditional definition of art and its objects?
Yes, I see the danger, but then again I think that,
This was not really an answer
by introducing artistic research, we have created, to the question. Not only here,
and are still creating, a free space that is also in op- but also in other questions (on
position to the demands of the market, to the discipline, identity, materiality), Michael Schwab’s intention
creative industries, to the daily strains of pro- was to question the ‘object’ naduction – a free space for ‘material thinking’, to ture of art in the light of artistic
use the term from Paul Carter. As a consequence, research as ‘boundary work’.
The central place of the ‘work’
I am not that afraid that the whole endeavour of – even when it is ‘floating’ and
artistic research will be corrupted in one way or epistemologically vague – may
another by the demands of the market. On the serve to obscure art that does
not wish to be understood as
contrary, I think it might be the case that in per- ‘work’. ‘Work’, however, is
forming artistic research we can have some in- not just an ‘object’, but also
fluence over what counts as art, and as an inter- ‘practice’.
esting outcome not only within academia but
also within the art world. That is rather optimistic, I think; but it could well be that not only our understanding
of what academia is might change in the future, but also our understanding of what art is.
So, you see artistic research as having a strategic role in these transformations?
Well, this is a part of the subsidiary agenda. It is not the first thing I
think about, but it might add some extra benefits. Whether or not to
call it ‘strategic’, I am not that sure.

183

Boundary Work: An Interview

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 184

Chapter 9

Artistic
Practices and
Epistemic
Things

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 185

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 186

Context
I wrote this chapter as a discussion paper for a working
meeting with Hans-Jörg Rheinberger entitled ‘Exposing
Practice’, held at Zurich on 17 June 2011 as part of the
Artistic Research Catalogue project (see chapter 11).
Rheinberger and Christoph Hoffmann, both from the
Max Planck Institute for the History of Science in
Berlin, gave their responses there to the discourse on
artistic research, with special attention to the meaning
that ‘research’ and ‘publication’ appear to have in that
discourse. I have appended an additional section at the
end of this chapter to briefly address this issue.
A dialogue with experts in philosophy of science or
in science and technology studies is of vital importance
to the process of establishing and justifying the field of
artistic research. This chapter and my final chapter are
early steps in such a dialogue.

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:10 Pagina 187

What does it mean to present art as research? What relationship exists
between art – artworks, artistic practices – and the presentation of art
as research in an academic context? This demarcation question is a hot
item in the debate on the emergent field of artistic research. The debate often concerns issues of institutional or educational politics that
are thought to be important for determining whether artistic research
can be recognised as a type of academic or scientific research. Prominent issues are the standards needed to assess research by artists, the institutional rights to award third-cycle (doctoral) degrees in the arts, and
the criteria to be applied by funding bodies in deciding whether to support research by artists.
Sometimes the focus is on issues from philosophy of science that
pertain to artistic research. Do the usual criteria for doing academic research (concerning research questions, methods, and justification) automatically apply to this new field of research? To what extent and in
what respects do artistic research activities differ from those in other
types of academic or scientific research? What are the similarities and
differences between artistic research and research in the natural sciences,
the social sciences, or the humanities?
I will focus here on the fundamental question of the epistemological status of artworks and art practices as research. How can things
that are fundamentally polysemic – that seem to elude every attempt
to tie them down, to define them – still function as vehicles of research?
That is, how can they function not just as objects of research, but as the
entities in which, and through which, the research takes place – and in
which and through which our knowledge, our understanding, and our
experience can grow. What is the nature of such an ‘object of research’,
particularly in terms of epistemology? What gives art the ability to generate new knowledge and understandings?
The foundational debate on artistic research needs input from
the disciplines that concern themselves with the history, the theory, and
the practice of the sciences: sociology of science, science and technology studies (sts), historical epistemology. By the same token, the philosophy of science – or more broadly, our understanding of what academia is – can be furthered by the things that take place in the
emergent field of artistic research. To help clarify the epistemological

187

Artistic Practices and Epistemic Things

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 188

status of art in the research process, I shall draw on some recent insights
achieved in research in the theory of science, focusing primarily on the
work of Hans-Jörg Rheinberger, director of the Max Planck Institute for
the History of Science in Berlin. Rheinberger studies the history and
epistemology of experimentation in the life sciences, in particular molecular biology. I will argue that Rheinberger’s ideas about the dynamics of experimental scientific practice – and the special status he assigns
to ‘epistemic things’ within those dynamics – may help to elucidate the
status of art within artistic research practices.
Rheinberger’s work may be attributed to the movement in the
philosophy of science that seeks to emancipate the ‘context of discovery’ in relation to the ‘context of justification’. It
See the final section of this
distances itself from the more empiricist and
chapter for comments on the
critical-rationalist notions of science that were in
difference between these two
contexts.
vogue until two decades ago. The goal is not
only to understand the dynamics of scientific
conduct, but to clarify the epistemology involved – that is, how knowledge is constituted in and through practices.
This ‘practice turn in contemporary theory’ (Schatzki et al. 2001)
– inspired by Edmund Husserl, Martin Heidegger, and phenomenological tradition, as well as by the later work of Ludwig Wittgenstein and
the pragmatist tradition – is manifest in a number of fields, including
the cognitive sciences (e.g. Noë 2004), science and technology studies
(e.g. Latour 1988, 1999; Latour and Woolgar 1986; Shapin and Schaffer
1989; Knorr Cetina 1999) and the study of social and cultural practices.1
As the context of discovery becomes liberated, practices and things take
the place of theories and mental states. Embodied, situated, and enacted
forms of cognition become more important to our understanding of research than world-mind representations and detached modes of rationality and objectivity.

1. Helga Nowotny (in her foreword to Biggs and Karlsson 2011, pp. xxii-xxiii) has highlighted the importance of sts, and in particular of actor-network theory (ant), for understanding artistic research ‘in this changing epistemological, institutional, and normative
landscape in the bewildering zones of uncertainties’.

188

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 189

Experimental systems
What is the epistemological status of art in artistic research? Are artworks or art practices capable of creating, articulating, embodying
knowledge and understanding? And, if so, what kinds of artworks and
practices do this (what is the ontological status of art here?) and how
do they do it (the methodological status)?
As I have suggested above, work in an entirely different academic
research domain – theoretical and historical research on experimental
practice in the life sciences – can help to clarify these issues.2 In his study
of the history and practice of research in the natural sciences, Hans-Jörg
Rheinberger has demonstrated that ‘experimental systems’ are the centre and the motor of modern scientific research. Rheinberger’s historical case studies, extending from the pre-war genetic experiments to
present-day molecular biology, show that the dynamics of experimental systems can only be understood as an interplay of machines, preparations, techniques, rudimentary concepts, vague objects, protocols, research notes, and the social and institutional conditions in which these
are employed. Experiments are not merely methodological vehicles to
test (confirm or reject) knowledge that has already been theoretically
grounded or hypothetically postulated, as classical philosophy of science would have it. Experiments are the actual generators of that
knowledge – knowledge of which we previously had no knowledge at
all. Experimental systems are ‘machines for making the future’, as
Rheinberger (2006a: 25/283) has observed, citing François Jacob, the
French biologist and Nobel Prize winner.
Experimental systems are characterised by the interplay and entwinement of ‘technical objects’ and ‘epistemic things’ – the technical conditions under which an experiment takes place and the objects of knowledge whose emergence they enable. The distinction is functional, not
material: ‘Whether an object functions as an epistemic or a technical en2. In some quarters of the art world, the life sciences are a subject of keen interest. I will
not be concerned here with crossovers between life sciences and the arts, such as in
BioArt, but with the more fundamental question of the very relationship between art and
knowledge.
3. Dual page references to Rheinberger’s texts refer respectively to the German and the
English versions (which may slightly differ).

189

Artistic Practices and Epistemic Things

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 190

tity depends on the place or “node” it occupies in the experimental context.’4 In this way, ‘epistemic things’ may turn into technical objects or instruments, thereby ensuring the relative stability in the experimental system that enables new epistemic things to appear. Systems must be
‘differentially reproducible’, Rheinberger argues, ‘if they are to still be
arrangements where knowledge can be generated that lies beyond anything we could conceive or anticipate.’5 But it also works the other way
round. Technical things, if deployed differently, may sacrifice their stability
and diffuse into epistemological questions. In molecular biology, for instance, organisms, or other entities such as genes, could sometimes be
things we want to know (epistemic things) and at other times be objects
through which we can know (technical objects). Rheinberger speaks in this
context of a synchronic intertwinement of the epistemic and the technical, and of a diachronic intertwinement of difference and reproduction.6
Rheinberger has deliberately chosen the term ‘thing’ rather than
‘object’, in order to signify the indeterminate, not yet crystallised status of the knowledge object. Epistemic things are ‘chronically underdetermined’ (2008: 14´30˝). Experimental systems must be sufficiently
open to allow these indistinct things to come into view; enough space
must be present to produce what we do not yet
Towards the end of chapter 7,
know. This openness and room for not-knowing,
I discussed this not (yet )knowor not-yet-knowing, cannot be imposed by stern
ing as ‘contingency’.
methodological procedures. As Rheinberger
points out, serendipity, intuition, and improvisation are at least as important in laboratory practice as the attempts that
are made to stabilise the technical conditions in which experiments take
place. That openness also implies ‘a kind of subsidiary awareness that may
serve to mitigate the classical notion of dualism of thinking and being
4. Rheinberger 2006a, 27/30. The German: ‘Ob ein Objekt als epistemisches oder als
technisches funktioniert, hängt von dem Platz oder dem Knoten ab, den es im experimentellen Kontext besetzt.’
5. 2008: 19´28˝ (my translation). The German: ‘Experimentalsysteme müssen differentiell
reproduzierbar sein, wenn sie Arrangements bleiben sollen in denen Wissen generiert
wird, das auch einmal jenseits dessen liegt was man sich hat vorstellen und was man hat
antizipieren können.’ Cf. also Rheinberger 2004: 5.
6. Rheinberger’s ideas have been significantly influenced by the writings of Jacques Derrida
(he translated De la grammatologie into German) and Gilles Deleuze.

190

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 191

(though not entirely transcending it) as a borderline case in a relativistic epistemology’ (2005: 72, italics added). By ‘subsidiary awareness’
(nicht-fokale Aufmerksamkeit) Rheinberger, commenting on Michael
Polanyi,7 is referring to a form of thinking that is obliquely based on tacit
knowledge, on implicit understanding that is partly sedimented in the
technical apparatus of the experimental system. This form of awareness,
Rheinberger says, ‘would enable us to let our thinking blend into the
things, and the things into our thinking, with hybrid forms in the middle that allow neither formalisation nor quantification, and which
thereby keep the research moving.’8 Epistemic things are precisely these
hybrid forms in which thinking and things are interwoven.

Artistic experiments
As I have pointed out elsewhere [in chapter 7, pp. 105-06], an artistic
experiment cannot be simply equated with a scientific experiment. In
fact, it would often appear that two different meanings of the word ‘experiment’ are being employed. In an essay entitled ‘Kunst als epistemische Praxis’ (Art as Epistemic Practice), Dieter Mersch (2009) has
attempted to draw a clear distinction between artistic and scientific experiments. Making reference to artists like John Cage, Karlheinz Stockhausen, and Joseph Beuys, he argues that artistic experiments are not
reproducible, and are in fact usually at variance with such a requirement. Nor do they primarily seek to augment knowledge, but rather
to engage in a specific form of ‘experimental reflexivity’ that touches on
the foundations of our perception (and not our understanding).
This and other descriptions of artistic experiments portray scientific experiments as method-driven, systematic, repeatable, and uni7. Rheinberger 2005: 62. ‘Forschung beruht auf wildem Denken, und wildes Denken
setzt stummes Wissen voraus.’ (‘Research relies on untamed thinking, and untamed
thinking assumes tacit knowledge’ (my translation).)
8. 2005: 72 (my translations). The full quote in German is: ‘… eine Form nicht-fokaler
Aufmerksamkeit, von der aus sich das klassische Konzept des Dualismus von Denken und
Sein zwar nicht aufheben, aber vielleicht entschärfen lässt als ein erkenntnistheoretischer
Grenzfall im Rahmen einer relativistischen Epistemologie. Diese würde es erlauben, das
Denken in die Dingen übergehen zu lassen wie die Dinge ins Denken, mit hybriden Bildungen in der Mitte, die sich weder formalisieren noch quantifizieren lassen, und die gerade dadurch das Forschen in Gang halten.’

191

Artistic Practices and Epistemic Things

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 192

The discourse on artistic research is significantly hampered
by the limited images that the
participants have of one another. See also my comment about
this in chapter 1, page 23.

versalisable, as rational and causal activities. Yet as
research by Rheinberger, Bruno Latour, Karin
Knorr Cetina, and others has shown, ordinary
laboratory practice, in the context of discovery, is
far less method-based than this, and many attributes normally associated with artistic discovery – such as instability, indeterminacy, serendipity, intuition, improvisation, and a measure of ‘fuzziness’ – also apply to scientific laboratory experiments
(Rheinberger 2005: 66). Cage’s assertion that ‘it is simply an action the
outcome of which is not foreseen’9 also describes the scientific experiment. The similarities are striking, and they invite closer investigation,
without automatically giving reason to fully equate scientific experiments with artistic ones.
The term ‘experimental system’ could give the impression of a
fixed structure, whose elements relate with one another in clearly ordered, stable arrangements. In using this term, however, Rheinberger
does not have a systems theory in mind, such as that of the German sociologist Niklas Luhmann. He is simply highlighting a loose coherence
between the various elements of the experimental system (technical,
epistemic, social, institutional elements), in both a synchronic and a diachronic sense.10 In the historical and philosophical literature on science,
the interest in experimental systems arose at the point where the theory-dominated view of scientific research began to make way for ideas
centring on practice (cf. Schatzki et al. 2001; Rheinberger 2004: 2). Now
practices generally manifest the same characteristics as Rheinberger’s systems. Practices also show a certain coherence and persistence. The Oxford English Dictionary defines ‘practice’ in one sense as ‘an established
procedure or system’. One can therefore just as well speak of ‘experimental practices’ as of ‘experimental systems’, not least because Rhein9. Quoted in Mersch 2009: 43.
10. In his online essay ‘Experimental Systems’, Rheinberger (2004) gives a more detailed
description of such a system. (a) It is the smallest discrete working unit of research; (b) it
must be capable of undergoing ‘series of differential reproductions’; (c) it is the entity
‘within which the material signifying units of knowledge are produced’; and (d) if experimental systems merge together or branch out, that can result in ‘ensembles of such systems, or experimental cultures’.

192

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 193

berger also applies his findings on experimental systems to academic
practices outside the laboratory, such as interpretation in the humanities, and notably writing.11 In the literature on the practice turn in
thinking about science, practices are not regarded as mere routines
guided by rules that are founded on well-ripened, if sometimes tacit,
knowledge and skills. They are also recognised as dynamic, creative,
constructive, and normative actions (Knorr Cetina 2001: 187; Rouse
2001: 189). In and through practices, knowledge comes into being. Scientific research is therefore anything but static; it is always ‘science in
action’ (Latour 1988).
In artistic practices, too, experience and expertise that have sedimented into tacit knowledge form a fertile ground for a dynamic, creative, and constructive process that enables the emergence of the new
and the unforeseen. At the same time, artistic practices – even the most
conceptual and the most transitory of them – are always technically and
materially mediated [cf. chapter 7, p. 156 above]. Such artistic practices
constitute the centre and the motor of research in the arts, just as experimental systems are the centre and motor of scientific research. This
will now enable us to sharpen the focus of our question about the epistemological status of art within artistic research.

Artworks as epistemic things
An experimental system thus involves the realisation and articulation
of epistemic things that derive their propelling force in the research
from their very indeterminacy (we don’t know exactly what we don’t yet
know, Rheinberger 2006b). Similarly, within artistic practices, artworks are the hybrid objects, situations, or events – the epistemic
things – that constitute the driving force in artistic research. To para11. ‘Das Schreiben, so behaupte ich, ist selbst ein Experimentalsystem. Es ist eine Versuchsanordnung. Es ist nicht nur ein Aufzeichnen von Daten, Tatbeständen oder Ideen.
Es ist auch nicht einfach der billige Ersatz für die lebendige Rede. Es ist nicht einfach das
transparente Medium der Gedanken. Es gibt ihnen eine materielle Verfassung und zwar
eine, die das Entstehen von Neuem ermöglicht’ (2006b: 5) (‘Writing, I would argue, is an
experimental system in its own right. It is the set-up of an experiment. It is not merely the
recording of data, facts, or ideas. Nor is it just a cheap substitute for the spoken word. It is
not simply the transparent medium of thoughts. It gives them a material substance, and
specifically one that enables something new to emerge’ (my translation).)

193

Artistic Practices and Epistemic Things

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 194

phrase Rheinberger, as long as artworks and their concepts remain
vague, they generate a productive tension: in reaching out for the unknown, they become tools of research.12 In the context of artistic research, artworks are the generators of that which we do not yet know.
They thereby invite us to think. Artistic research is the articulation of
this unfinished thinking.
It is a commonplace to argue that art transforms things and situations and robs them of their unproblematic status. Yet therein lies its
epistemic potential. Artistic practices, like experimental systems, are ‘vehicles for materialising questions’ (Rheinberger 2006a: 25/28). Knorr
Cetina ascribes to epistemic things the ability to infinitely unfold: ‘I
want to characterize objects of knowledge (“epistemic objects”) in
terms of a lack in completeness of being that takes away much of the
wholeness, solidity, and the thing-like character they have in our everyday conception’ (Knorr Cetina 2001: 181). This fundamental incompleteness (Adorno would say ‘non-identity’) points us towards an ‘unfolding ontology’ (ibid.). Artworks as epistemic things can never
become fully transparent, and it is this structural lack of completeness
that is the fuel and the motor of a creative, constructive practice, in
which meanings emerge and realities are constituted.
In the context of artistic research, artworks
Constructivist realism
are epistemic things and events that have not yet
been ‘understood’ or ‘known’ – or, to be sure, that
resist any such epistemological grip. Art’s knowledge potential lies
partly in the tacit knowledge embodied within it and partly in its ability to continuously open new perspectives and unfold new realities. I
have elsewhere described this ‘knowing’ as pre-reflective and non-conceptual. I would now like to characterise it, with Rheinberger, as a productive not-yet-knowing against the backdrop of an ever-receding knowledge horizon.
What is the reality of these epistemic things? What reality is being unfolded here? Rheinberger: ‘We might tentatively say that the
12. ‘As long as epistemic objects and their concepts remain blurred, they generate a productive tension: they reach out into the unknown and as a result they become research
tools’ (2010: 156).

194

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 195

“epistemic thing” is to scientific activity what a “statue” is to the art of
sculpture, a “picture” to the art of painting, a “poem” to the art of poetry. It is the “scientific real” that is engendered by scientific activity.’13
Research in the arts, then, articulates the ‘artistic real’ as engendered by
art practices. In some sense, this artistic real is more real than our everyday reality.14 And this is exactly where the importance and the urgency
of research in the arts lies. The artistic real is an enCf. also my remarks on ‘facts’ in
gendered reality – a factum, something that has my annotation on page 46 of
been made, not a datum, something that was given chapter 2 and in chapter 8, page
beforehand (2008: 22´36˝). An artistic ‘fact’, like a 182.
scientific, social, or historical fact, is what we make
real with our epistemological undertakings.
Constructivist realism
This does not mean that we must lapse
into some kind of relativism, idealism, or crude
constructivism: ‘Experimental scientists’, writes Rheinberger (and I argue that this also applies to artists), ‘do not read the book of nature, they
do not depict reality. But they do not construct reality either. They are
not engaged in platonistic exercises, in asymptotic approximations to
an always presupposed essence of reality, or in bluntly social constructivist endeavours’ (2006a: 282; cf. English version, 225). The dynamics
of both artistic and scientific research lies in the dialectics of revelation
13. 1992: 69 (my translation). Rheinberger has adopted the term ‘scientific real’ from Gaston Bachelard. The German: ‘Man könnte versuchsweise sagen, das “epistemische Ding”
sei für die wissenschaftliche Tätigkeit das Äquivalent zur “Skulptur” für die Bildhauerei,
zum “Bild” für die Malerei, oder zum “Gedicht” für die Poesie. Es ist das in der wissenschaftlichen Aktivität hervorgebrachte “Wissenschaftswirkliche”.’
14. ‘The particular reality of the scientific real is […] its capacity to drive beyond itself, to
give space to unprecedented events. It is exactly in this sense that experimental arrangements are, in a way, “more real” than our good everyday reality. The reality of an epistemic thing explored within an experimental system resides in its resistance, its resilience, its
capacity, as a joker and obstacle of practice, to turn around our previsions as well as our
imprevisions, in a word, to give birth to unprecedented events’ (Rheinberger 2004: 8). Cf.
my own observations [above in chapter 7, p. 171]: ‘When we listen to music, look at images, or identify with body movements, we are brought into touch with a reality that precedes any re-presentation in the space of the conceptual. That is the abstractness of all art,
even after the long farewell to the aesthetics of early Romanticism. In a certain sense, this
reality is more real, and nearer to us, than the reality we try to approach with our epistemological projects. This is the concreteness of all art, even in its most abstract forms and
contents.’

195

Artistic Practices and Epistemic Things

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 196

and constitution. Artistic and scientific research
is about something real, while simultaneously
transforming it into what it could be.
The fundamental incompleteness or non-identity of artworks as
epistemic things – of art as research – creates room for what is unthought and unexpected. ‘The endless game of realization of the possibles’ (2006a: 283/225) invites us to dwell at the frontier of what is, and
of what we know or can know. The condition of art as research is a condition of contingency. The openness of art is what invites us, again and
again, to see things differently.

Constructivist realism

‘Research’ and ‘publication’
At the working meeting entitled ‘Exposing Practice’ (Zurich, 17 June
2011), Hans-Jörg Rheinberger, in response to the discussion about the
meaning of the term ‘artistic research’, drew a distinction between the
epistemic and the artistic. Traditionally – that is, in the history of the
sciences – the term ‘research’ has been applied to the domain of the scientific and the epistemic, and not to that of the artistic or the arts. The
term ‘artistic research’ would seem to conflate the epistemic interest and
the artistic interest. Christoph Hoffmann added that ‘knowledge’
should be understood as propositional knowledge, and as such it is tied
to epistemological standards and cannot simply be merged with conviction, belief, or aesthetic experience. I have sufficiently treated the latter issue in previous chapters.
At the same time, Rheinberger saw potentials for linking the
epistemic to the artistic (or the aesthetic). He cautioned against making the distinction between the epistemic and
It is important to keep in mind
the aesthetic too sharp, as there are gradations,
that links can be laid between
intermediate forms. There could also be mututhe artistic and the epistemic –
specifically (with reference to
ally incompatible extremes, but in a chain of inLatour) through transformateractions à la Latour these might eventually be
tions that occur in a chain of interactions. As I will show in my
brought together. It may therefore be insufficient
final chapter, artistic research into think about the sciences without aspects of
volves precisely this type of
the artistic. And, on the other hand, in thinking
transformations – from artistic
product to artistic argument.
about the arts one would also consider the epistemic.15

196

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 197

Rheinberger was right, of course, to point out that the term ‘research’ is historically associated with the domain of the sciences (although it is also used in other contexts). As for the epistemic, however, there are also historical ties with the artistic, in particular in the
tradition of philosophical aesthetics, as I have discussed in chapter 7.
Moreover, it is quite possible, though perhaps not very common, that
the meaning of particular words changes because their usage changes,
either now or in future. Often, in fact, the very history of what is denoted by those words, or at least our interpretation of that history,
may change.
A second issue addressed at the meeting was what the word ‘publication’ might mean in the context of artistic research. Hoffmann drew
a clear distinction here between research and publication – in other
words, between the context of discovery and the context of justification.
Scientific and academic publications, including those in the humanities, according to Hoffmann, always involve the presentation of the ultimate findings or results, in the sense of produced facts, which stand
at the end of a possibly long research chain.
Ultimate findings, however, can only be conceived of at the extreme – as unreachable limiting cases or as regulative ideas or ideals –
for no ultimate research results actually exist, just as no ultimate foundation exists for our knowledge claims. In this sense, every produced
and justified fact is a tentative fact, and therefore always part of a continuing discovery, part of a science that is transforming itself.
Contemporary theory of science (and sciThis is a crucial issue that goes
ence and technology studies in particular) shows to the heart of what artistic reus that it is untenable, and not even defensible, to search is. The outcomes of artismaintain a strict separation between the context tic research are in part artefacts
– they are artworks. As I have
of discovery and the context of justification (and pointed out, such artefacts are
between values and facts). Publications are not fundamentally open in nature,
terminal stations in a scientific quest; they are al- and this is the very quality that
invites us to ‘unfinished thinkways tentative representations of what is sur- ing’. The contexts of discovery
mised. This basically open nature of ‘publica- and justification melt together
tions’ is not a shortcoming that we have to live here.
15. Based on an audio recording of the working meeting.

197

Artistic Practices and Epistemic Things

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 198

with, rather – in the case of artistic research – it is the starting point.
Publications in the sphere of artistic research are better understood as
contributions to a discursive field that is constantly in motion. As epistemic things, artworks not only play a constitutive role in a process of
discovery that eventually culminates in produced and justified facts.
They are not just generators of knowledge. They are also (and I differ
here with Rheinberger’s view) that which is generated. This alliance of
constitution and realisation, of discovery and justification, may be
called, with Latour, constructivist realism.

198

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 199

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 200

Chapter 10

Ingredients
for the
Assesment
of Artistic
Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 201

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 202

Context
Neither this chapter nor the following contains annotations. They were written for the completion of the book.
The present chapter serves as a springboard to the next,
which will be a reconstruction and evaluation of the
process of founding the Journal for Artistic Research. The
ingredients for the assessment of artistic research have
been compiled here from the preceding chapters, and
will be put into operation and tested in the final chapter.
Although I am aware that this is not an impartial undertaking, I still think it wise to refrain from mentioning
here the more political and institutional issues involved.

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 203

In previous chapters I have examined artistic research from many different angles. It is now time to give a brief synopsis of the key issues I
have discussed up to now. The present chapter will serve as a pivot between the topics dealt with so far (the theoretical framework) and the
analysis to follow (the case study).

Résumé
In chapter 1, ‘The Conflict of the Faculties’, I provided an initial blueprint of my research domain, drawing on four different perspectives on
the relationship between theory and practice in the arts. These were the
instrumental, the interpretive, the immanent, and the performative perspectives. This culminated in three recommendations for the conduct
of research in the arts, focusing on method, the type of outcome, and
the form of the documentation.
My second chapter, ‘The Debate on Research in the Arts’, explored the background of the foundational debate on artistic research
in the light of its institutional context and of philosophy of science. After discussing several terminological matters and research definitions,
I raised the issue of the specific nature of research in the arts. This resulted in a preliminary determination of the conditions that art practice must meet in order to qualify as research.
In chapter 3, ‘Artistic Research and Academia’, I highlighted the
fundamental tension between the artistic and the academic worlds and
went on to argue for a broader conception of research and academia
that allows for non-discursive knowledge forms and unconventional
research methods. That chapter also provided a tentative characterisation of the non-conceptuality, the realism, and the contingency of
artistic research.
In a critique of the standard model of research and development
– and in debate with prevailing policy on science – I examined in chapter 4, ‘Artistic Research within the Fields of Science’, to what extent
artistic research may be understood as a form of Mode 2 knowledge production. I emphasised here that artistic research is a research field that
involves both the quest for fundamental understandings and the production of artefacts that have meaning in the art world, as well as the
relationships between those two aims.

203

Ingredients for the Assessment of Artistic Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 204

Chapter 5, ‘Where Are We Today?’, surveyed the current status
of this emerging field and the gradual establishment of the new paradigm of artistic research within institutional frameworks. In the section
on the epistemology of artistic research, I examined the goal of enhancing our experiential world in juxtaposition to the goal of advancing knowledge and understanding.
The hybrid nature of artistic research – attributable to its field
of operation in two contexts: the world of art and the world of science
– was the starting point of chapter 6, ‘Artistic Research as Boundary
Work’. Written more as a pamphlet, it expands the theme of artistic research to other life domains and to the role that artistic research might
play there.
In chapter 7, ‘The Production of Knowledge in Artistic Research’, I discussed similarities and contrasts with other fields of research
in the humanities (aesthetics in particular), the social sciences, and the
natural sciences and technology. The second part of the chapter drew
on the premises set out in chapter 2 to address the question of whether
artistic research can qualify as academic research. I concluded by elaborating in more detail on the characterisation of artistic research as nonconceptual, realistic, and contingent, which I introduced in chapter 3.
In the interview I have included as chapter 8, ‘Boundary Work’,
I emphasised once again the open, unfinished nature of artistic research.
An important observation here was that artistic facts are necessarily epistemologically vague – the very reason why they are productive.
In ‘Artistic Practices and Epistemic Things’ (chapter 9), I explored
this epistemological incompleteness in more depth in a comparison
with the theoretical work of the science historian Hans-Jörg Rheinberger. Artworks and art practices are ‘epistemic things’ par excellence
that point towards what we do not yet know and that invite us to unfinished thinking.
Throughout the book, sometimes explicitly, sometimes more implicitly, I plead the case for the institutional recognition of research in
the arts, to include both the awarding of academic degrees and the
funding of artistic research.
In my concluding chapter, to follow this one, I will apply the insights I have accrued up to now in a specific case study: the creation and

204

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 205

development of the Journal for Artistic Research (jar). The assessment
of concrete artistic research in the context of jar is at once the operationalisation and the touchstone of the claims I have made above. In
jar praxis, the theory of artistic research is verified or put to work, as
it were. But prior to that case analysis I first need to gather together and
regroup the ingredients we have examined so far that are pertinent to
the assessment of art as research. My point of departure will be the tentative definition of research in the arts I have formulated in chapter 2:
Art practice qualifies as research if its purpose is to expand our
knowledge and understanding by conducting an original investigation in and through art objects and creative processes. Art research begins by addressing questions that are pertinent in the
research context and in the art world. Researchers employ experimental and hermeneutic methods that reveal and articulate
the tacit knowledge that is situated and embodied in specific artworks and artistic processes. Research processes and outcomes are
documented and disseminated in an appropriate manner to the
research community and the wider public.
This definition was developed on the basis of an exploration of (1) what
it means to do academic research and (2) what then the specific ontological, epistemological, and methodological characteristics of research
in the arts are. In subsequent chapters, I refined, or in some cases broadened, that definition on certain points. In the present chapter I will
again focus on the elements of this definition with specific reference to
the assessment of art as research, also taking my elaborations into account. I will start from the issue raised in chapter 2 of the ontological,
epistemological, and methodological status of art in the research – of
art as research.

Towards evaluation criteria
In chapter 3 (‘Artistic Research and Academia’), page 69, I already highlighted ‘the intertwinement of ontological, epistemological, and
methodological perspectives – the circumstance that defining an object
is always at once both an epistemic act and an indication of ways to gain

205

Ingredients for the Assessment of Artistic Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 206

access to it’. The distinction I made between these perspectives in chapter 2 therefore served mainly a heuristic purpose: to focus the reader’s
attention on the particular aspects or perspectives that may play a role
in research in the arts (cf. chapter 8).
The intertwinement of ontology, epistemology, and methodology is also manifest in the theoretical work of Hans-Jörg Rheinberger
(chapter 9). The diffuse ontological status of Rheinberger’s epistemic
things (which he called ‘things’ for good reason), their unfinished nature, is fundamental: epistemic things derive their very knowledge-generating power from the fact that they are indistinct, not yet fully crystallised. And whereas the one time these things are, in a methodological
sense, vehicles through which we can know, the next time they are, in an
ontological sense, things we want to know; and then another time they
are, in an epistemological sense, things that embody knowledge. The
phrase ‘research in and through the arts’ captures this intertwinement
of perspectives: it is about the knowledge, understandings, experiences, and perspectives that are embodied in art objects and practices,
and which manifest themselves through the praxis of the arts, the
praxis of making and playing. In artistic research practice, art lets us
know what it is and what perspective it offers.
I have also described the open nature of the ‘object’ of artistic research as ‘boundary work’ (chapters 6 and 8). From this viewpoint, too,
artworks and art practices are polysemic and contingent. Depending on
the context in which they are placed, they may manifest themselves as
artefacts and actors in the network of the art world, the field of cultural
production, or they may reveal themselves as epistemic things that generate insights in an academic context. The term ‘boundary work’ alludes
to the negotiations that are continuously underway along the borderline between art and academia (and between art and other life domains),
where the presumed stability of things is relinquished in favour of an
open outlook on what is possible and what we do not yet know. This
contingency of artistic research is inseparably bound up with the nondiscursive and non-conceptual nature of its content (chapter 7). The
object at issue partly eludes our epistemological grip. Even in the most
abstract forms of art, the reality that unfolds in this artistic research (cf.
chapter 9) is an articulation of the world we live in. With Rheinberger

206

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 207

in mind, I refer to this reality as the ‘artistic real’; in chapter 7 I call it
the ‘realism’ of artistic research.
We may conclude from all this that artistic research is ontologically, epistemologically, and methodologically an open undertaking,
and that any assessment of whether a particular artistic practice qualifies as research must take this fundamentally open nature into account.
No stable boundaries exist that delimit in advance what belongs to the
domain of artistic research and what does not. There is always work to
be done along the borderline of art and academia. But this does not
mean that no criteria or guidelines can be formulated that may help in
the assessment process.
Here again we are dealing with the issue of demarcation: the criteria we can set out, or the guidelines we can apply, to distinguish artpractice-as-research from art-practice-in-itself. One possible approach
to this issue lies in the word ‘as’ in the phrase ‘art as research’. The classical distinction between artwork, art production, and art reception
(which I discuss in chapter 1 in connection with research in the arts)
and the heuristic distinction between object, process, and context (introduced in chapter 2) will be helpful here.
At the moment when art claims to be research in the emphatic
sense (when artists assert that their artwork is also intended as research)
– thereby making an epistemological claim – the art situates itself in academia. This inscribes the artwork, the concrete objects or practices, on
the other side of the border separating art and academia. One can then
justifiably ask what knowledge, what understanding, what insight,
what experience this work embodies or attempts to put across. One may
expect of the artist-researcher that she or he will substantiate this claim
before the ‘academic forum of peers’.
The positioning of art as research is a purposive act. The production of the work, the artistic creative process, is carried out not only
for the purpose of creating artefacts that can circulate in the art world,
but also as a means of generating insights that contribute to what we
know and understand about ourselves in the world, and which also further the development of the discipline in question (cf. chapter 4). In research in the arts, the insights and understandings are interwoven in the
artistic material and are disclosed through the artistic creative process.

207

Ingredients for the Assessment of Artistic Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 208

If the thus positioned art is perceived as research, the signifying
context comes into play. Naturally this includes the context of the art
world, the public reception of the art, and the cultural and historical
environment, but it also includes academic discourse – the discourse
in art history, philosophy of art, and other disciplines. The academic
context is not, however, exclusively a context of justification. As we have
seen, it is also a context of discovery and application. How an artwork
has come into being and what meaning it has in the art world is academically relevant in the case of artistic research. In this way, art as research is embedded in social, artistic, and theoretical contexts with
which it engages. The signifying context of artistic research also involves
the work of others and the artistic and theoretical stances that work represents, and possibly also the artist’s own prior work that has led up to
the present work of art.
Thus, in the assessment of whether particular artistic practices
qualify as research, the artworks themselves (the artistic objects and
practices), their production (the creative artistic process), and their reception (the interpretive context) will all be weighed.
The definition of art as research that I formulated in chapter 2
and have quoted above can now serve as a template as we draw up criteria or guidelines that can aid in assessing whether artworks and art
practices qualify as research. The elements in that definition have been
the subject of separate discussions in chapter 7. These are the intent of
artistic practice, the originality criterion, the contribution to knowledge
and understanding, the research question, the context of the research, the
research methods, and the documentation and dissemination of the findings. The broadened conception of what research is (addressed in particular in chapters 3 and 4) also informs the discussion of those separate elements, slightly refining or qualifying them at times. Those
refinements or qualifications, which I will not recapitulate here, need
to be considered in both the formulation and the application of the
guidelines. The elements will nonetheless continue to serve as a sort of
checklist, guiding us, as it were, to the questions we can and may ask
of every artistic practice that claims to be research. In the case study in
the next chapter, we will see if and how this translates into the editorial policies and the content of the Journal for Artistic Research. I will

208

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 209

now go into more detail about the elements of art as research and the
questions we can derive from those elements.

The questions we may ask
The first element is the intent of artistic practice. At the moment an
artistic practice claims to be research as well as art (in the emphatic sense
of the word ‘research’), the artist in question affirms academic discourse;
and that is no equivocal matter. All too often, artists claim to be doing research while at the same time opposing (for a variety of reasons)
what academia stands for, or what they think it stands for. One aim of
this book is to show that such resistance is unnecessary – no more than
the opposition is justified, still pervasive within academia, to artistic
practice that claims to be research. I have broadly described the forms
of resistance and tried to refute them, particularly in chapters 3 and 4.
The obvious, but also fundamental, question that needs to be posed as
a guideline to any artistic research is: It is indeed research? An affirmative answer implies that the research engages with that which the academic world considers research, assuming that an enriched conception
of ‘academic’ and ‘research’ is being used.
The second element is the criterion of originality and its corollary that the research must not lapse back behind what others have already done. There is not much to add to this observation. One should
recall the distinction I have introduced in chapter 7 between artistic and
academic originality. True artistic research is original both artistically
and academically, in the sense that it gives us something we did not yet
have – new knowledge about the world, about ourselves, or about the
art form in question; a new perspective on what we thought we knew
and understood; a new experience that makes us see, hear, perceive
things differently. Or perhaps also a new form in which something can
be cast or a new technique through which something can be addressed.
At the same time, one must bear in mind that a researcher is often partly
or entirely unaware of what is being sought at the time the research begins. This calls for a measure of caution when judging a research design or evaluating work in progress. The question that may be asked as
a guideline is therefore: Does the research deliver or promise to deliver
new insights, forms, techniques, or experiences?

209

Ingredients for the Assessment of Artistic Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 210

On the third element – the contribution to knowledge and understanding – I have already expounded a great deal in previous chapters. It seems good to repeat here in different wordings that, with the
emancipation of experiential knowledge (in the sense of tacit, non-conceptual knowledge that lies enclosed in bodily and sensory experience
and in pre-reflective action), the experience of rational knowledge has
been extended or supplemented by experiences of embodied forms of
knowledge (including aesthetic experiences), and that these are now
coming back to claim their epistemological status, two centuries and
a half after Baumgarten. A fully developed notion of academia will reincorporate these forms of knowing and knowledge within its walls. In
the preceding chapters, from the first onwards, I have left open the
question of whether the production of knowledge, understanding,
and experience should be examined from a hermeneutic or a constructivist point of view. Do we discover what exists, or does what we
discover exist? Here, again, I must leave this question open, although
the identified intertwinement of ontology and epistemology would
seem to dissolve this very antithesis. In previous chapters I have repeatedly (with reference to Latour) called attention to this with the annotation ‘constructivist realism’. What is important here, however, is
the question we can use as a guideline in assessing the art as research:
What knowledge, what understanding, and what experience is being
tapped, evoked, or conveyed by the research?
The fourth element is the research question, the subject or object of the research, the issue addressed in the research study. Keeping
in mind the refinements I have made in chapter 7, but leaving these
aside for the moment, one might, with respect to this element, expect
every researcher to present the study in a way that makes clear to the
assessor that something is at stake here, that something of interest is being mooted or that a particular development is to be furthered. The
form this presentation takes may vary; it does not always have to include
a closely defined research question or well-constructed hypothesis.
The artistic-academic forum may also be addressed with a non-linguistic exposition of the subject that employs other forms of discursivity
to pose the ‘question’. Just as for the other elements, a criterion of persuasiveness pertains here: Is the description or exposition of the topic,

210

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 211

issue or question sufficiently lucid to make clear to the forum what the
research is about?
The fifth element involves the context of the research. As has often been pointed out, one characteristic of research in the arts is its dual
context – that of the art world and that of academia. Much artistic research is also transdisciplinary, in the sense that it links the art to other
domains (academic or non-academic). Moreover, the contexts of discovery, justification, and application are interwoven in artistic research
practice. In assessing art as research, one can inquire about these contexts: What relationship does the research have to the artistic or the social world, to theoretical discourse, and to the contributions that others are making or have made on this subject?
The sixth element is the research method. Artistic research can
take on widely divergent forms. Depending on the topic, the contexts,
the aim, and the scope of the research, the artist can also employ research methods and techniques derived from other fields of endeavour,
including science. This methodological pluralism is still coupled, however, with the requirement that the research must take place in and
through artistic practice. The implication is that the artist will often be
actively engaged in the research process. Experimentation, participation,
interpretation, and analysis are thereby intertwined in the research. In
assessing the research, one should judge how well-suited the chosen
methods are to addressing the research question: Does this experiment,
participation, interpretation, or analysis provide answers to the question posed and, by so doing, does it contribute to what we know, understand, and experience?
The seventh element involves documenting and disseminating
the research results. In some part, the outcomes of artistic research are
artworks or artistic practices, including images, compositions, designs,
installations, choreographies, productions, or performances, but also
more abstract artistic products such as concepts, interventions, or
processes. The documentation provided with these research findings
will need to show respect for the ways in which artists document, expose, and publish their work, that is, respect for how the art is conveyed.
The documentation of artistic research is not the same, however, as the
documentation of artistic work. It additionally requires discursive elab-

211

Ingredients for the Assessment of Artistic Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 212

oration, in which, of course, artistic material can be used. As explained
in chapter 7, the discursive documentation may be devoted to a reconstruction of the research process, to an interpretation of the ‘material’ research outcome, or to a discursive approximation of or allusion
to the artistic work. The documentation may also be expected to conform to what the academic world considers responsible publication; if
provided in text form, for example, that might include conventions relating to the structure and reasoning of the argumentation, to references, to quotations, and to style. In view of the intertwinement of the
artistic and the academic in the research, however, this is not an ironclad rule; but artist-researchers who decide to deviate from the guideline may well be expected to demonstrate through artistic or traditional
means why they have done so. The question that can be asked in assessing the artistic research is therefore: Does the nature and design of
the documentation support the dissemination of the research in and
outside academia?
To recapitulate, here are the seven questions again that can and may be
asked in the assessment of a particular artwork or practice as research:
1.
2.
3.
4.

5.

6.

7.

212

It is indeed research?
Does the research deliver or promise to deliver new insights,
forms, techniques, or experiences?
What knowledge, what understanding, and what experience is
being tapped, evoked, or conveyed by the research?
Is the description or exposition of the topic, issue, or question
sufficiently lucid to make clear to the forum what the research
is about?
What relationship does the research have to the artistic or the social world, to theoretical discourse, and to the contributions that
others are making or have made on this subject?
Does this experiment, participation, interpretation, or analysis
provide answers to the question posed and, by so doing, does it
contribute to what we know, understand, and experience?
Does the type and design of the documentation support the dissemination of the research in and outside academia?

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 213

Together with the criterion that artistic research takes place in and
through the practice of art and that the outcome of the research is also
art, we can now put these questions to work as a kind of assessment
framework for the case study on the Journal for Artistic Research.

213

Ingredients for the Assessment of Artistic Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 214

Chapter 11

The Case of
the Journal
for Artistic
Research
Or how a new field of
research is articulated

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 215

We are allowed to speak
interestingly by what we allow
to speak interestingly.
We have taken science for
realist painting, imagining
that it made an exact copy
of the world. The sciences
do something else entirely –
paintings too, for that matter.
Through successive stages
they link us to an aligned,
transformed, constructed
world.
Bruno Latour*

* Bruno Latour, Pandora’s Hope: Essays on the Reality of Science Studies (Cambridge, ma:
Harvard University Press, 1999), pp. 78, 144.

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 216

Context
This chapter describes an undertaking in which many
people are involved, yet it is written from one participant’s point of view. It is important to remember that
the jar editorial board members, the colleagues from
the Society for Artistic Research, and partners from the
Artistic Research Catalogue project have all made their
contributions to the creation as well as to the conceptual
and material design of the journal.
This is also a chapter in which, occasionally, I employ
the insights provided by Bruno Latour’s sociology of
science. One such insight involves the nullification of
the antithesis between theory and practice. jar is the
realisation of an idea, the articulation of a proposition.
Theory and practice are inseparably tied together in jar.
This constructivist realism enables me to partially answer
the question I raised at the beginning of chapter 1 about
the relationship between theory and practice.

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 217

This is a story about the creation and workings of a new peer-reviewed
journal in a new field of research. Or better, it is a story about how people, institutions, works of art, and discursive practices meet to form a
heterogeneous network – a network in which the new field of research
is performed, enacted, and made real. And it is a story about how software development, funding arrangements, legislation, and review procedures and criteria transact and interact, thereby transforming the network actants (both human and non-human), while at the same time
providing the artistic research network with temporary material, strategic and discursive stability, and durability.
By choosing these words to report on the Journal for Artistic Research (jar), I reveal the influence that actor-network theory (ant) –
an influential variant within science and technology studies (sts) –
has had on my work. Any narrative told against the backdrop of a theoretical framework will serve to sustain that framework (or perhaps
to undermine it). It is not my intention, though, to prove that ant
is right, nor to modify or enhance it. In my choice of words, my angle of approach, or the ways I tie things together, I will employ ant
‘loosely’, like a bricoleur – an image that sts, as it happens, sometimes
makes positive use of.
I am thereby taking up the advice recently given by Helga
Nowotny, president of the European Research Council, to researchers
in the arts:

sts has unravelled many heterogeneous networks that extend
throughout society and among its actors and institutions. In
these heterogeneous networks, ‘humans’ and ‘things’, i.e. artefacts, are linked in multiple and mutual relationships. By extending the concept of ‘agency’, ant or actor-network theory
claims that the production of new knowledge is taking place in
numerous sites and through many transactions and transformations that extend throughout society and its institutions without
losing sight of the ‘objects’ and their materiality. From an ant
perspective, humans and the artistic phenomena they produce
and interact with, can also be seen as constituting continuously
reconfigured assemblages. Researchers in the arts are therefore

217

The Case of the Journal for Artistic Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 218

well advised – and invited – to delve into the burgeoning sts literature. There they will find much that appeals to them intuitively, but also much that allows them to ‘make sense’ of their
own artistic practices.1

jar, rc, sar
The Journal for Artistic Research2 is an enhanced, open-access, international peer-reviewed journal for the identification, dissemination,
and discussion of artistic research, its methodologies and outcomes, in
all the disciplines of art. Issue 0 of jar was launched at a conference
in Bern in Switzerland on 4 March 2011. The contributions to that inaugural issue were invited by the editorial board and were not peer-reviewed. As I wrote the present report, the peer-reviewed issue number
1 was in the making and was to be published in November 2011.
My account will not directly examine the individual jar contributions. The assessment of those contributions was, and is, in the
hands of peer reviewers, and it is not my task to do their work over
again. Central to my analysis in this short history of jar is the way
that assessments are carried out, what ‘peer review’ means in the context of jar, and what considerations were involved in formulating the
peer review guidelines.

jar is the material and conceptual outcome of a process – the artistic
research field in action (to paraphrase Bruno Latour). To understand
how jar came about and what was mobilised to achieve it, we must go
back to the autumn of 2009, to Solstrand, on the Norwegian west coast
near Bergen. Here – at a crucial developmental moment in the new field
of research – people, instruments, institutions, and ideas all played their
part in creating and articulating a network, and at the same time
transforming its constituents into allies in an exciting, challenging
new endeavour.
1. Helga Nowotny, ‘Foreword’, in Michael A.R. Biggs and Henrik Karlsson (eds), The
Routledge Companion to Research in the Arts (London: Routledge, 2011), p, xxii.
2. See jar n.d. <www.jar-online.net>. Some formulations in this chapter are drawn from
the wordings used on the jar website.

218

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 219

For six successive years, the Bergen National Academy of the
Arts, with support from the Research Council of Norway, organised
conferences entitled Sensuous Knowledge in Solstrand.3 The title explicitly refers to Alexander G. Baumgarten, retrospectively regarded by
one of the conference initiators, Professor Søren Kjørup of Bergen and
of Roskilde University in Denmark, as an originator of the new research
paradigm. Kjørup’s ideas were later published as Another Way of Knowing, the first in a book series also entitled Sensuous Knowledge, published
by the project at Bergen Kunsthøgskolen.4
The sixth and final conference at Solstrand (sk6) was held from
23 to 25 September 2009. The formula was similar to that of previous
meetings: the focus was on the presentation of concrete artistic research
in small-scale workshops with plenty of discussion. The sk conferences
were not the only ones of their kind. Several other conference series had
been held in the past decade that likewise focused on the new research
field. These included the Research into Practice (r2p) conferences
(every other year from 2000 to 2008), convened by the University of
Hertfordshire; and the Practice as Research in Performance (parip) conferences in 2001, 2003, and 2005, organised by the University of Bristol, both with support from the Arts and Humanities Research Council in the United Kingdom.5 Two Dutch initiatives should also not go
unmentioned: the symposium entitled ‘Artistic Research’, organised by
the Global Vernunft Foundation, in Amsterdam’s Maison Descartes (1112 April 2003); and the expert meeting entitled ‘Kunst als Onderzoek’,
held a year later in Amsterdam’s Felix Meritis centre (6 February 2004)
on the initiative of the Art Theory and Research Group at the Amsterdam School of the Arts.
The sk6 conference in Norway was also the scene of a renewed
encounter between three people of varied backgrounds that were to play
a critical role in the development of jar. They were Florian Dombois,
an artist and geophysicist who at the time headed the Y Institute for
Transdisciplinarity at the Bern University of the Arts; Michael Schwab,
3. See sk n.d. <http://sensuousknowledge.org/>.
4. See Kjørup 2006.
5. See r2p n.d.; parip n.d.

219

The Case of the Journal for Artistic Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 220

artist and philosopher, lecturer at the Royal College of Art, London; and
myself, Henk Borgdorff, who specialises in research in the arts at the
University of the Arts, The Hague, and the University of Gothenburg,
and who, in writing the present report, is privileged to serve as a kind
of participant ethnographer.
From autumn of 2008 on, Michael Schwab had been receiving
support from Florian Dombois to work at the Bern University of the
Arts on developing an online journal for the publication of artistic research. I had met Dombois earlier at a lecture I gave in Berlin in October 2005, as well as at a seminar I held in Zurich in December 2006.
All three of us were working to conceptually clarify the phenomenon
of artistic research, had occasionally communicated by e-mail, and had
been intending to speak more extensively at some point.
In 2008, Dombois, Schwab, and I had been invited to contribute
to a conference at the Zurich University of the Arts (zhdk), held under the auspices of the European League of Institutes of the Arts
(elia), the network organisation for arts education in Europe. The
theme of the conference was the distinction between art and artistic research, an issue of demarcation that had been surfacing again and again
in the international debate.6 During that conference in Zurich on 2324 April 2009, a lively debate arose in the corridors about artistic research, and in particular about the ways it should be documented.
Around that same time, Schwab had drafted a ‘call for support’ for the
creation of a journal, and from June 2009 onwards the three protagonists were in intensive contact about the proposed journal and about
who and what would be needed to make it happen.7
This ‘who and what’ came together in a productive way at the
Norway conference in the autumn of 2009. One part of the development plan for the journal was the design of a digital database for the
6. The proceedings of the conference were published as Caduff et al., 2009.
7. We were all three heavily interested in the theoretical and political rationale of artistic
research. Beyond this, Dombois brought his managerial and his financial expertise to the
project, while Schwab concentrated more on the conceptual framework. I was happy to
contribute, too, with my growing network in the artistic research field. It is not always
easy to distinguish between the voices of Dombois, Schwab, and myself when reporting
on the development of jar.

220

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 221

documentation and ‘exposition’ of artistic research. The Journal for
Artistic Research was to be an enhanced publication that would store and
give integrated access to images, audio files, and videos as well as texts.
An essential requirement was that the artistic research was to be displayed
in ways that would fulfil artists’ expectations. Clearly, new software had
to be developed for that purpose, as the existing repositories did not meet
the requirements we had set for the future platform.8 The envisaged database was seen as the mainstay of the journal. Two months previously, in
July 2009, Schwab and I had conceived the idea of creating a strategic
separation between the development of the Research Catalogue (rc), as
the digital database was called in the plans, and the proposed journal. For
the rc, I saw opportunities to apply for financial support from the international Regional Attention and Action for Knowledge Circulation
(raak) programme operated by the Stichting Innovatie Alliantie (sia) of
the Netherlands Ministry of Education, Culture and Science.
There were also content-based reasons to set the rc apart from the
journal, reasons that were intrinsic to the nature of the two initiatives. jar
had been conceived as a peer-reviewed academic periodical for artistic research. In the art world, among artists and curators, a good many reservations existed (and still exist) towards ‘artistic research’, and definitely towards academia. To build bridges between the worlds of art and academia
is one of the very purposes of the entire project of jar and rc. Or more
precisely, once artistic research is introduced into the art world and into
academia, the latter two domains might not only find more common
ground, but might even alter slightly in character. Notions of what the
art world is, and what the academic world is, could be broadened and enriched by the emergence of the new field of research. The network surrounding jar could make significant contributions to that transformation,
as well as to the stability and durability of the research field.9 The rc is
8. It was Michael Schwab who developed the idea and the conceptual and material
framework of the Research Catalogue.
9. jar does not stand alone. Other journals that focus on the field of artistic research are
Art and Research, Inflexions, Studies in Material Thinking, Mahkuzine, and Art Monitor.
Mostly they do not publish artistic research work itself, but critical reflections on it.
Published conference proceedings, such as the Working Papers in Art and Design, are also
available.

221

The Case of the Journal for Artistic Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 222

a material actor here, an ‘immutable mobile’ (Latour), that ensures stability, mobility, and combinability in the new field.
This Research Catalogue (rc), then, is inclusive, bottom-up, and
open-ended. That is to say, in principle any person can gain access to
the database to document or expose their work; it is a resource or tool
for self-publishing; and there are no other restrictions other than those
attached to the use of the software. Artists (or anyone else) can make
use of this platform to provide access to and disseminate their work,
without first having the work assessed by others. In jar, by contrast,
assessment by others is crucial. But who are those ‘others’? And what
criteria do they apply in their assessments? These were issues to be addressed later in the journal’s editorial policy.
The database is searchable at various levels – from keywords to
documented work. Artworks and art practices that are documented as
part of an rc exposition can be located and cited by others. By publishing
their work in the rc, artists not only document it, but they also establish links to the growing community of artist-researchers worldwide who
are committed to communicating their work as research. The rc provides
a platform for artistic research. Documentation and publication of work
in that context implies that it is also intended as research, and that it can
be ‘read’ as such without someone first having to determine where the
lines of demarcation are. This makes the rc an interesting instrument
for the emergent research field. It is this very absence of previously defined boundaries that will enable the new research field to develop.
In Solstrand, the jar network took further shape. The application for Dutch developmental funding for the Research Catalogue was
a topic of discussion. For the application to succeed, it was important
to have sufficient support from the field itself. The president of elia
pledged support via his network organisation. The initiative would later
be presented at the elia biennial conference in Nantes in October 2010.
Support was also garnered during the Norway conference from two
other network organisations, the slsaeu (the European section of the
Society for Literature, Science, and the Arts) and the aec (European
Association of Conservatoires). They, too, enabled jar and the rc to
be introduced at respective conferences in Riga (June 2010) and Warsaw (November 2010).

222

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 223

Ultimately, the following partner institutions were to participate in deAfter Norway, the organisers continued to veloping the Research Catalogue:
work intensively in late 2009 on creating a network • University of the Arts, e
Hague, Department of Research in
of artists, arts institutions, arts schools, universities, the Arts
and research centres which, with support from the • Zuyd University, Research Centre
Dutch funding body, would begin building the rc. on Autonomy and the Public Sphere
in the Arts, Maastricht
The application for a two-year grant was approved • Gerrit Rietveld Academie,
in January 2010, and the project was launched on Research Group on Art and Public
1 March 2010 with financial support of more than Space, Amsterdam
• Utrecht School of the Arts,
400,000 euros. It bore the name Artistic Research Utrecht Graduate School of Visual
Art and Design (mahku), Utrecht
Catalogue and operated from The Hague.
In the course of the project, it became clear • De eaterschool, Amsterdam
Master of Choreography, Amsterdam
that the distinction between ‘work’ and ‘exposi- • Leiden University, Academy for
tion’ would be crucial for the rc (and for jar).10 Creative and Performing Arts, Leiden
In every academic research publication, the work • Van Abbe Museum, Eindhoven
• Basis voor Actuele Kunst (bak),
that is done in the context of discovery or that is Utrecht
critically scrutinised (in the laboratory, in the • Het Huis van Bourgondië, Maasfield, at the researcher’s desk) is ‘exposed’ in ways tricht
• V2_ Institute for the Unstable
that both fulfil the standards of scholarly dis- Media, Rotterdam
semination and involve a transformation (La- • Royal College of Art, Curating
tour) of the content. Whether the work concerns Contemporary Art, London
• Bern University of the Arts, Y Inempirical data collection, ethnographic field re- stitute for Transdisciplinarity, Bern
search, historiography, or technical design, the re- • Max Planck Institute for the Hissearch topic is always transformed and modelled tory of Science, Berlin
• Karlsruhe University of Arts and
into an object of knowledge and is made to speak Design, Project gamma, Karlsruhe
through academic publication. In this way, ob- • Massachusetts Institute of Techjects of proto-knowledge – indistinct things and nology, Program in Art, Culture and
Technology (act), Cambridge, Massituations – acquire tentative ontological and sachusetts
• Journal for Artistic Research
epistemological forms (cf. chapter 9).
The same applies to research in the arts. (jar), hosted at Bern University of
the Arts, Bern
What first belongs to the art world (and has its • Vrije Universiteit Brussel,
own place there) is transformed in the context of Department of Research and Development, Brussels
• European League of Institutes of
10. This was also the theme of a working conference of
the Arts (elia)
the Artistic Research Catalogue project in December
• European Association of Conser2010 in Gothenburg. Michael Schwab deserves credit for
vatoires (aec)
coining the term ‘exposition’ as described here.
• European Society for
Literature, Science and the Arts
(slsaeu)

223

The Case of the Journal for Artistic Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 224

academic discourse into a conveyor of, or embodiment of, knowledge
and understanding. This makes artworks into ‘boundary objects’ – hybrid objects or practices whose status varies according to the context in
which they appear. In the view of the rc, ‘works’ are not just documented, but exposed. That is, in the rc one may ‘stage, perform, curate, translate, unfold or reflect practice as research’.11
The Journal for Artistic Research – built as a portal on the Research Catalogue – is an online, open-access periodical. It has no subscribers, and anyone can consult the journal at any time. It hence has
no subscription income either. The call for support that went out
through many channels on 23 November 2009 was partly intended to
garner support from people and institutions that were willing to provide material support to the project. In the early months of 2010, it became increasingly clear that a legal entity would need to be created. Innumerable people worldwide – artists, academics, and others – had
declared their support, and a growing number of institutions had expressed willingness to assist jar financially. The launch of jar and rc
in March 2010 therefore coincided with the establishment of the Society for Artistic Research (sar). Its mission is
to display and document work in a manner that respects the
artist’s modes of presentation while fulfilling the expectations of
scholarly dissemination, and to re-negotiate the relationship of
art to academia, and the role and function of research in artistic practice.12
At this writing, more than thirty institutions worldwide (chiefly universities and academies of the arts, but also national research institutes)
support the Society. This has fostered a closely knit but dynamic network of relations between ideas, concepts, instruments, artefacts, people, and institutions surrounding the proposed journal.
Since March 2010, work on the Research Catalogue has been in progress,
11. Michael Schwab, ‘Editorial’, Journal for Artistic Research, 0 <http://www.jaronline.net/index.php/issues/editorial/480>.
12. See the jar webpages for information about the Society for Artistic Research.

224

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 225

Instruments

rc
Research Catalogue

Ideas
Concepts

ar
Artistic
Research

jar
Journal for
Artistic Research

art
Artworks
Artefacts
and Practices

sar
Society for Artistic
Research
People
Institutions
parallel to preparations for the initial (trial) issue of jar and for building the Society. Artists and curators collaborated (both independently
and via their institutions and art schools) in the Artistic Research Catalogue project with academics and software developers. Their guiding
question was:
What kind of instrument for the documentation, dissemination
and discursive signification of artistic research projects can meet
the interests of professional artists, art institutes and art students
engaged with forms of art practice as research? And how to
build an instrument, which, at the same time, is inclusive towards
the specific needs and demands that originate from the different
art disciplines?
The project description further elucidates this as follows:
[rc] positions itself between art practice and academia, between
the world of art and higher arts education. Artistic research occupies a discursive field linking extensive documentations of both

225

The Case of the Journal for Artistic Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 226

research and art work with expositions and comments that engage with the signification of the work as research. Adding work
to this catalogue makes a claim that the work can be seen as research; through expositions, comments and articles the initial
claim is transformed into an argument. Finding a suitable structure in which to develop the relationship between documentation and exposition plays a difficult but important part in artistic research.13
Feedback from established and trainee artists and from academics led
to recommendations and software adaptations. Practical and conceptual issues were discussed in workshops and conferences in Leiden,
Gothenburg, Bern, and Zurich. A first version of the software was released in March 2011, after which artists ‘from outside’ were able to access the rc and use it to document their artistic research work. By August 2011, about 125 artist-researchers worldwide were actively using the
rc. In November 2011, a new release of the software was launched,
which was more user-friendly and offered possibilities for pre-publication collaboration, extended forms of commenting, and the publication of review reports.
Because jar is a peer-reviewed academic journal, submitted
contributions are subjected to the critical scrutiny of external reviewers who are considered experts on research in the arts or specific areas
within it – research, that is, in which artworks or art practices constitute the heart of the research from a methodological and epistemological point of view. jar’s policy is to carefully seek out, for each contribution, the expertise appropriate to the topic in question. For every
submission, at least three reviewers are requested to write evaluation reports, guided by a standard peer review form (another ‘immutable mobile’ in the jar network).14 Because the artistic and the academic are interwoven when art is exposed as research, both artists and academics
13. These are extracts from the project application, which is unpublished. See arp 2010
<http://innovatie-alliantie.nl/projectenbank/raak-project/724-artistic-research.html> and
arc 2010 <http://www.kabk.nl/pageEN.php?id=0485> for more information about the
Artistic Research Catalogue project.
14. The peer review guidelines can be accessed through the jar website.

226

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 227

will normally take part in every assessment. This type of extended peer
review is increasingly common outside the arts domain as well.15 In the
field of artistic research, the ‘community of peers’ is still in development.
The creation of jar is a significant step in that process.16
jar currently uses a single-blind review process, with open-review
publication. During the review process, the reviewers are anonymous;
the artists/authors are not. In the field of art, a double-blind review
process would be unrealistic, as artworks often carry the ‘signature’ of
the artist who created them. When a submission is accepted for publication in jar, we publish the review reports, edited by the reviewers.
The reviewers have the option to publish their names with the report
or to stay anonymous. Most reviewers opt to make public both the review report and their identity. The ambition of jar is that not only the
editors, but also the reviewers engage with the submitted material
without relinquishing the ‘external scrutiny’. Open dialogue is vitally
important in the emerging field of artistic research. In future, jar will
therefore seek to facilitate open-process collaboration and commentary
through the Research Catalogue platform. A further ambition is to include real-life events (such as exhibitions or performances) in the assessments. A working group in the Society for Artistic Research is currently studying that possibility, but it is still uncertain whether the
limited confines of the online journal would allow for that.
The criteria or guidelines for the assessment of jar submissions
focus on three main issues. First – and the order of the criteria is not
without import – an exposition should be able to effectively impact
upon, and artistically and intellectually engage, a targeted audience. Second, peer reviewers are to judge whether the contribution exposes art
as research. The third, more specific requirement is that the artistic and
15. Cf. Gibbons et al. 1994.
16. Building a community of peers is likewise one objective of the share academic network. share (Step-Change for Higher Arts Research Education) is a project supported by
the European Commission in which thirty-five graduate schools and other institutions involved in third-cycle research in the arts in twenty-six European countries work together.
The project runs from October 2010 to October 2013 and is coordinated by elia and the
Graduate School of Creative Arts and Media (Gradcam) in Dublin. See share n.d.
<http://www.sharenetwork.eu/>.

227

The Case of the Journal for Artistic Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 228

intellectual proposition underlying a contribution should be supported
by the design of the exposition and the mode of navigation through it.
The peer review form additionally requires reviewer self-assessment. Could a conflict of interest exist? What expertise does the reviewer have and what weight does the reviewer attach to that expertise
in relation to the subject of the submission? A further question is
whether there are possible ethical or legal issues that need to be allowed
for in the assessment. Finally, each reviewer is asked to provide feedback
to jar to help improve the review process. As the review form makes
clear, the jar editorial board is aware of the limitations and pitfalls of
any review process, especially anonymous ones. An annexe therefore
provides some ‘notes on constructive reviewing’. In my discussion of
the peer review guidelines that will now follow, I shall confine myself
to the three main criteria.

Artistic and intellectual interest
This is what the guidelines for reviewers say about the first criterion:
Is the exposition of artistic/intellectual interest? Although difficult to assess, expositions are sought that endeavour to address
important artistic issues or intellectual problems in a specifically
artistic manner and which engage others in the field. Please tell
us whether or not the submission is interesting in its subject,
methods or outcomes.
Interestingly, few differences of opinion emerged about this criterion. In
the discourse surrounding jar, everyone agreed that the contributions
should be artistically and intellectually interesting or challenging. Within
this criterion, the emphasis lies on the artistic manner in which the issues and problems are approached. This is the quality through which jar
distinguishes itself from other academic platforms that publish on art.
Following the publication of issue 0, this was a topic of some concern.
One member of the Society’s executive board wrote, for example,
I am concerned about the quality of jar contributions. I had
real trouble with [title omitted]: to be honest, I found it neither

228

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 229

artistically nor intellectually satisfying. […] Forgive me this directness, and it is not against anybody. Last year we came really,
really far, but I see quite a way to go before issue 1. I see jar not
as a PhD publication journal, but as an international professional
journal of the highest calibre that sets the pace for artistic research, challenging both the art market and academia.17
By stressing professionalism and by referring to the art market, the
writer makes clear that his prime focus is on artistic quality. If jar is
not artistically convincing, it is doomed to fail. Many, if not all, commentators were convinced of that. It is therefore literally the first and
foremost criterion.
For jar 1 and subsequent issues, an extensive pool of available reviewers has been created. An important objective was to ensure a sufficient range of expertise. In the jar context, ‘extended peer review’
means that both the artists’ perspective and the academic perspective
have to be represented. The number of artists worldwide who now occupy academic posts or hold academic doctorates is considerable, especially in the anglophone world and in Scandinavia. Their number is
also clearly increasing on the European continent and in parts of Asia
and South America. But the idea was also to call on the expertise of
artists who are rather further away from academia, who are unfamiliar
with academic mores, or who have reservations about academic culture
and practice. In addition, it was necessary to mobilise both specialist
knowledge from the various disciplines of art as well as generalist
methodological knowledge.
Artistic research is a relatively new research field, and jar, by virtue
of its exceptional format, constitutes a singular and challenging platform
within that field. jar is challenging not only to the artist-authors, who
have to work with a beta version of the rc editor that is none too userfriendly as of yet, but also to the reviewers. Some familiarity with artistic research, or at least a willingness to engage with it, is essential.
jar is inclusive, also in terms of the divergent views that exist
with respect to artistic research. Roughly speaking, one can discern three
17. From private email correspondence.

229

The Case of the Journal for Artistic Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 230

such points of view: (1) the academic perspective, (2) the sui generis perspective, and (3) the critical perspective.
1.
The academic perspective – associated by some with how the
new research paradigm is institutionalised in the English-speaking world, notably in the UK – puts value on traditional academic criteria when it comes to differentiating art practice as research from art practice in itself.
2.
The sui generis perspective – associated by some with how artistic research made its entry into academia in the Nordic countries
– foregrounds artistic values when it comes to assessing research
in the arts.
3.
The critical perspective – associated by some with how one is
struggling with the Bologna imperatives in the German-speaking countries – emphasises the critical, or even subversive, force
that research in the arts might exercise in opposition to the
neo-liberal tendency in our post-Fordist knowledge economy to
subsume everything deviant under a single umbrella.
All these considerations have been taken into account in putting together the pool of reviewers and referring submissions to them.18

Art as research
The second guideline for reviewers invites them to judge whether the contribution exposes art as research. Affirming this implies that the contribution addresses (though it does not necessarily conform to) the prevailing
academic standards for the conduct of research. Clearly this criterion (or
perhaps ‘guideline’, as some participants had misgivings about the term
‘criterion’) constituted one of the most challenging topics in the discourse.
The discourse has been pursued, among other places, since July 2010 on
the online forum operated by jar19 and in March 2011 at the meeting in
18. The twelve submissions that went into peer review for jar 1 were eventually judged by
forty external experts. One submission was accepted in the first round, needing only small
changes. Most submissions were sent back for modification or improvement on the basis
of the reviews. Ultimately, jar 1 appeared in November 2011 with eight expositions and
twenty-six published review reports.
19. See <http://www.jar-online.net/blog/category/peer-review/> [accessed 7 January
2012].

230

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 231

Bern that launched jar 0. Naturally it has been a topic of continual discussion in the jar editorial board, as well as online and during face-toface or Skype conferences. This is what the peer review form as of August
2011 asks of the reviewers with the respect to the second criterion:
Does the submission expose practice as research? In the Research
Catalogue, practice is exposed, translated, transformed, performed,
curated etc. as research. The claim to be research implies a relationship in one way or another to academic criteria for the conduct
of research. The submission need not comply with all (or even one)
of the points listed here. But one might question whether it does,
and if not, what the artistic, aesthetic or intellectual rationale is.
Please take into account:
• whether or not the submission contains a description or exposition of the question, issue or problem the research is exploring, and if not, if such an omission matters;
• whether or not the submission shows evidence of innovation in
content, form or technique in relation to a genre of practice;
• whether or not the research issue is contextualised, which may
include social, artistic, and/or theoretical issues that the work
responds to, a discussion of a range of positions taken by other
artists to whom this work contributes a particular perspective,
and some documentation of work by the artist that led to the
present submission, and if not, if such an omission matters;
• whether or not the submission provides new knowledge, interpretation, insights or experiences, and what (kind of ) new
knowledge, interpretation, insights or experiences these comprise;
• the adequacy and soundness of the methods used and the
thoroughness of research, analysis, and/or experiment.
In the light of this criterion (or better, these criteria), the task is now
to examine whether they are consistent with the ‘assessment framework’
proposed in the previous chapter. Here, again, are the seven elements
of that framework:

231

The Case of the Journal for Artistic Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 232

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

intent
originality
enhancement of knowledge
research question
contextualisation
methodology
documentation and dissemination

The first element, intent, involves not so much whether art is research,
but whether a particular artistic practice is intended as research. At the
point where an artist exposes her work in jar or in the rc, she inscribes
that work, as it were, into the research discourse. By so doing, she asserts that the work is also to be regarded as research. In the context of
the peer-reviewed journal, such a claim is subject to intersubjective evaluation. And something exceptional occurs here, in an epistemological
and an ontological sense. The work exposed in the Research Catalogue
‘transforms’ (Latour) from an artistic product to an artistic argument,
to a potential bearer of knowledge and understanding. At this moment,
artworks and art practices explicitly become epistemic things (Rheinberger), exposed as research in order to set our thinking into motion.
The intent criterion is captured in the all-encompassing question
‘Does the submission expose practice as research?’ The remainder of the
sub-criteria may be seen as more specific refinements of this question.
The explanatory notes accompanying the question make it clear that
the jar editors have an open conception of what academic research is.
‘The submission need not comply with all (or even one) of the points
listed here.’ In line with the liberalisation of academia as traced in previous chapters, jar not only endorses the emancipation of non-discursive knowledge forms, unconventional research methods, and enhanced modes of presentation, but it also assumes that the boundaries
of academia are not fixed. As science and technology studies also have
shown us, academia is not a stable system, but one that is constantly
evolving, one whose boundaries are continually shifting.
That is not to say, however, that no boundaries exist. Even if our
beliefs and knowledge claims have no ultimate ontological or epistemological ground, the temporary stability of the academic system is

232

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 233

safeguarded by the methodological criterion of reflexivity (in the context of justification, at least; in the context of discovery, that stability
is temporarily ensured by ‘immutable mobiles’ (Latour) or ‘technical objects’ (Rheinberger), and in the context of application by the effect or
impact of the research). Like Neurath’s ship, artistic research is chronically underdetermined. A revision or rejection of criteria is possible
only if some criteria are held constant, including the reflexivity criterion. Letting go of it would lead to a departure from academia. In this
sense, jar is also reflexive: ‘But one might question whether [the submission] does [comply with the points listed], and if not, what the artistic, aesthetic or intellectual rationale is.’ In the words of Catharina
Dyrssen (2011: 91), in a review of jar in the artistic research yearbook
of the Swedish Research Council:
How then should the demands be stipulated, by whom and why,
and what does this mean for jar? Obviously it is not a question
of pre-defined or self-appointed authorities who decide the
game-rules but of a gradual debate, in which the arguments – in
artistic and rhetorically critical form – hopefully increase sharpness and depth.
On the other elements of the assessment framework, I can be briefer.
With respect to the originality criterion, which refers to innovation in
content, form, or technique, some commentators wondered whether
this is a permissible criterion for the field of artistic research. As one contributor to the jar forum argued:
This one is problematic; whether a body of art must involve innovation (or novelty?) as a necessary condition for its being a
valid part of a research process is not clear to me. A valid research
process could use well-tried art processes (i.e. not innovative
ones). Success in the art world does not require being a reflexive researcher (though that is not excluded).
Seemingly, then, there is indeed something to be said for relaxing this
criterion, if not actually removing it. Although jar intends to publish

233

The Case of the Journal for Artistic Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 234

significant work, that significance does not necessarily dwell in artistic newness. It may also lie in qualities such as an exceptional, original
way in which the artistic is used as an instrument, as a method, as an
argument, or is made to speak or to connect to other discursive or nondiscursive parts of the exposition.
The originality criterion gains additional import, however, when
viewed in relation to two other elements from the assessment framework: enhancement of knowledge and contextualisation. One may ask
of every contribution what insights or experiences it delivers and how
it relates to the current state of the art in the field it is relevant to. Originality pertains here primarily to these aspects.
With respect to knowledge enhancement, the guidelines ask
‘whether or not the submission provides new knowledge, interpretation,
insights or experiences, and what (kind of ) new knowledge, interpretation, insights or experiences these comprise’. One thing worth noting
from this wording is that experiences are treated on a par with knowledge, interpretations, and insights. As I have pointed out in chapter 8,
it is a point of debate of whether this experiential component of artistic research – the aesthetic experience – can be considered to belong to
the space of reasons. Or does this experience, which, although cognitive, is non-conceptual and non-discursive, have no epistemological
bearing? In itself, perhaps it does not, though opinions differ. Now this
just happens to bring into focus one of the particular dimensions that
the Research Catalogue and jar are intended to address. At the moment
that the exposition links the artwork to other non-discursive and discursive elements, the artistic work that evokes aesthetic experiences becomes transformed into an epistemic thing (Rheinberger). And precisely
because the work is not fully transparent, our thinking is set in motion,
meanings may loom, and realities may be constituted. The knowledge
that lies enclosed in the aesthetic experience and that is embodied in
the art, and the reality that is enacted and constituted in artistic practices, both manifest and articulate themselves in and through the artistic research as exposed.
With regard to the question of ‘whether or not the submission
is contextualised’, one participant in the debate commented:

234

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 235

[It] is debatable how explicitly or implicitly the artistic researcher
needs to demonstrate that s/he is aware of the context and how
much s/he needs to give explicit connections. I can imagine here
also non-verbal or semi-verbal solutions […]
Analogously to the other criteria, what is especially important here is
how convincing the contextualisation is to the research community, and
not a predetermined mould in which that contextualisation is to be cast.
That said, this criterion does seem to demand much of the artist-researcher: a positioning with respect to social, artistic, and/or theoretical issues and to relevant work by oneself and other artists. Here too,
however, the wording of the question leaves room for the artist to make
a reflexive choice that is appropriate for the exposition – ‘which may
include …’, ‘and if not, if such an omission matters’.
A similar qualification applies to the criterion about the research
question – ‘and if not, if such an omission matters’. At first glance, this
would seem to nullify the criterion, but in fact it testifies to the reflexivity and openness of jar. An issue may often, but not necessarily always,
be raised in the form of a written question that is then addressed using
research methods. The guidelines refer to ‘a description or exposition’. jar
deliberately invites artists to consider presenting their research topic (issue, question, problem) by artistic means. And here, again, the power of
persuasion is the ultimate measure: Is the problem pertinently, convincingly, and compellingly introduced and articulated? The topics addressed
by the jar contributions can and will, of course, be widely divergent. Focuses may lie on the artistic material, on the creative process, or (as will
frequently be the case) on social or other issues that may initially seem
to be outside the true domain of the artistic, but which are brought forward, or even rendered ‘visible’, by the artwork or artistic practice.
This also highlights the transdisciplinary character of jar (without,
of course, precluding intra-disciplinary research). Transdisciplinarity is distinguishable from multidisciplinarity or interdisciplinarity by the fundamental ways in which the premises of the discipline(s) are, or can be, challenged in the light of a situation that is indeterminate. Transdisciplinarity
may be understood in three ways in the context of jar. Art research can
form ties with other academic, scholarly, or scientific disciplines, and this

235

The Case of the Journal for Artistic Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 236

partly involves rendering the methodological and epistemological viewpoints of artistic research fruitful and fluid in the other academic context
(and vice versa). Within the domain of the arts, transdisciplinarity may
also concern the relationship between the artistic research and current concerns in art, what is important in the art world (and how ‘research’ is understood there) – briefly, the relationship between academia and art –
which is always a turbulent one. Finally, transdisciplinarity in the context
of jar refers to ways in which artistic research may engage with other life
domains, with the physical or social environment, with politics, with globalisation, with identity or other realms.
All these forms and instances of transdisciplinarity also always involve transformations (Latour). Academic research is transformed by the
‘practice turn’ that is ideal-typically performed in artistic research. Our understanding of the art world and academia is transformed by the entry of
artistic research into both domains. And, more modestly, the world we
live in is transformed by the artistic-reflexive constitution of alternatives.
The methodological element in the jar assessment framework
is examined by the question about ‘the adequacy and soundness of the
methods used and the thoroughness of research, analysis, and experiment’. In the workshop held to discuss the review process for jar, conducted at the conference in Bern where issue 0 of jar was launched, several participants registered their objections, not so much to the idea that
the research must be methodologically justifiable, but to the way this
‘criterion’ was formulated in terms like ‘adequacy’ and ‘thoroughness’.
The workshop summary put it as follows:
There were suggestions within the group that the guidelines for
the peer reviewers not be overly prescriptive, allowing scope for
individual interpretation, and there were contestations that the
peer review guidelines were academic in a ‘scientific’ fashion in
describing what research was. […] It is felt that the guidelines as
written have the possibility of frightening artists away from presenting that material for review.20
20. See: <http://www.jar-online.net/app/webroot/uploads/SAR%20AGM%20Minutes%202011.pdf> 11 [accessed 7 January 2012].

236

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 237

It is important to note that those attending in Bern were mainly people who are amenable towards artistic research and towards jar. Though
such warning signals have not yet led to adaptations to how the criterion is formulated, to a different choice of words, that is expected to
happen later. After all, part of the mission of jar (and of the Society
for Artistic Research) is to also connect to those artists and art practices
that stand further away from academia.
The final element of the assessment framework, documentation,
and dissemination, brings us to the third guideline for peer reviewers,
which specifies that the artistic and intellectual proposition underlying
a contribution should be supported by the design of the exposition and
the mode of navigation through it.

Design and navigation
This is the question that the peer review form puts to the assessors:
Does the exposition design and navigation support the (artistic)
proposition? A basic, legible design is preferred, provided it does
not pose an obstacle to the presentation of the exposition. Whenever design choices differ from basic design, they will have to make
sense (even if this sense might be ‘confusion’ at times).
Please take into account:
• if the design and navigation support the exposition;
• if you think a correct or feasible use of referencing is used in
the submission;
• the readability of the submission (including the use of the
written English language).
It is not necessary to comment here on the language issue (jar is officially multilingual, but all expositions must also be submitted in copyedited English) nor on the guidelines pertaining to the use of footnotes
and references, the citation method, and the composition and format
of bibliographies. jar expects these to be consistent and asks authors
to use the author-date citation style of the Modern Humanities Research Association (mhra). Yet the format of jar itself does necessitate

237

The Case of the Journal for Artistic Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 238

an exceptional way of making references from and to jar. This calls for
a brief explanation.
The publications in jar (and in the rc) are called ‘expositions’
in order to make it clear that a transformation occurs from an aesthetic
project to an artistic argument. Expositions in jar consist of one or
more ‘pages’. These are web pages on which the research material
(text, images, sound recordings, videos) is interwoven in ways that allow the artistic work to manifest itself as research. The ways in which
the material is arranged on the pages may have meaning for what is being told; the content of the exposition does not stand in isolation from
the design of the exposition, nor from the ways that the ‘reader’ is able
to navigate through the exposition. In this way, jar enables the artist
to deviate from the standard format of journal articles. In the first place,
this is because images and sounds are not subordinate to, but fundamentally on a par with the text; but it is also because the opportunity
is provided to break out of linear narrative structure. jar does offer the
artist-authors a basic design guide, but everyone is free to diverge
from it if they can make clear why.
Pages can theoretically stretch out infinitely in two dimensions.
What appears on the computer screen is an ‘aspect’ of the page, a selection. Navigation tools make it possible to move that aspect to other
parts of the page, just as one scrolls through web pages. The computer
screen can be shifted, as it were, over the page in all directions. jar
makes it possible to make references to these ‘aspects’; each aspect has
a unique url that can be retrieved by a simple mouse click and cited
elsewhere. Hyperlinks in and between pages expand the battery of navigation and citation options. Artworks and art practices, or representations of them, which are identified uniquely in the database by different media files, can also be ‘cited’. The Society for Artistic Research,
which runs the journal, has devoted considerable attention to the
copyright issues involved here. The files in the database, the elements
of the page (including images, texts, and sound clips), the pages themselves, and the entire exposition are tagged with meta-data, making the
expositions in jar and in the rc retrievable in bibliographic searches
and compatible in principle with the formats of other academic repositories. This makes jar an ‘enhanced publication’, whose multifarious

238

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 239

research materials are accessible to others in accordance with the openaccess principle.
Usually, the design of a publication (for instance, the way a text
is arranged on a page) is not a subject of peer review. What is important in jar is the manner in which artists expose their work as research.
This warrants the inclusion of a separate section on this dimension in
the reviewers’ guidelines. At present, most artist-researchers are still
choosing a ‘classical’ format and hierarchy: a continuous vertical or horizontal text running parallel to visual or sound elements. Some, however, have chosen different approaches, such as inviting the user to more
associative navigation or building in well-reasoned choices into the navigation route.

Improving the peer review; feedback
from reviewers
jar was created to support the emerging field of artistic research, in and
beyond academia. The ‘open submission’ process (the opportunity to
self-publish art as research in and through the Research Catalogue), the
planned provision for open-process collaboration and commentary in
the rc, and the publication of peer review reports alongside the expositions – all these are aimed at creating a discursive field where research
can flourish and develop. jar’s policy is to seek possibilities to strengthen
artistic research and its culture. The aim is not in the first place to decide what does and does not belong to the field, but to encourage those
working in the field to progress. In the course of events, we have realised
that jar needs to ask its reviewers more explicitly to seek the potential
in submissions and to seek ways of improving the research expositions.
The guidelines for reviewing – as sedimented in the peer review form
– have therefore been adjusted since November 2011: a specific section
on ‘recommendations’ has been added, in which reviewers are asked to
state what the potential of the submission is and how improvements
might be made.
When reviewers were asked whether their reviews could be published (under their name or anonymously), the overall response was very
positive. Two examples:

239

The Case of the Journal for Artistic Research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 240

I am happy for you to publish the process in the way that you
describe. That seems to me to be a very innovative thing to do,
and I hope that the other reviewers agree. It will make a very useful resource for writers and reviewers, and will be of particular
interest to research students and early career researchers.
I am impressed with the efficacy of this reviewing system. Proceeding case by case, we have here a tool for improving the level
of artistic research projects as a whole. My congratulations for
this very valuable work!21
Of the thirty reviewers who worked on the published exposition,
twenty-six responded positively to the request to publish the reports.
Their reports can be accessed via the expositions in jar.

Close
This brings the story of the creation and workings of the Journal for
Artistic Research, focusing on the assessment criteria for submissions,
to a close. jar is still in a germinal stage. I have traced how jar came
into being – how a dynamic network of human and non-human actors grew up around the new journal, becoming materially and strategically more stable and durable all the time. I have examined the role
played by ‘immutable mobiles’ – particularly the research catalogue
and the peer review form – in the development of jar. And I have
shown how these and other (f )actors bring about transformations in
the emerging field of artistic research. Documented artistic practices
transform into exposed artistic research. Academia transforms into a
reflexive domain in which non-discursive knowledge forms, unconventional research methods, and enhanced modes of presentation have
a place. The art world transforms, slowly coming to understand itself
in a different light with the advent of artistic research. And the human actors in this field – artists and academics, editors and reviewers, software designers, and policymakers – transform into allies in a
common cause. In jar, the new field of research is articulated, a new
21. From email correspondence with two reviewers.

240

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 241

reality is shaped. jar is not so much a response to an altered reality
as the articulation of a proposition – a proposal made by artistic research to academia and the art world. Latour has conceived for this
the expression ‘constructivist realism’.

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 242

Bibliography

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 243

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 244

Literature
Adorno, Theodor W. 1966. Negative Dialektik (Frankfurt am Main:
Suhrkamp)
— 1997. Aesthetic Theory, ed. by Gretel Adorno and Rolf Tiedemann;
newly trans., ed., and intro. by Robert Hullot-Kentor (London:
Athlone Press). German original Ästhetische Theorie (Frankfurt
am Main: Suhrkamp, 1970)
Allegue, Ludivine, and others (eds). 2009. Practice-as-Research in Performance and Screen (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan)
Aristotle. 1963. Politics, trans. by Benjamin Jowett (Oxford: Clarendon
Press)
Bal, Mieke. 2002. Travelling Concepts in the Humanities: A Rough
Guide (Toronto: University of Toronto Press)
Barrett, Estelle, and Barbara Bolt (eds). 2007. Practice as Research: Approaches to Creative Arts Enquiry (London: I. B. Tauris)
Bauer, Ute Meta (ed.). 2001. Education, Information, Entertainment: Aktuelle Ansätze künstlerischer Hochschulbildung (Vienna: Selene)
Biggs, Michael A. R. 2003. ‘The Role of “the Work” in Research’, paper presented at the parip 2003 Conference, Bristol, 11-14 September <http://www.bris.ac.uk/parip/biggs.htm> [accessed 30
December 2011]
— 2004. ‘Learning from Experience: Approaches to the Experiential
Component of Practice-Based Research’, in Forskning-Reflektion-Utveckling, ed. by Henrik Karlsson (Stockholm: Swedish Research Council), pp. 6-21
Biggs, Michael A.R., and Daniela Büchler. 2008. ‘Eight Criteria for Practice-Based Research in the Creative and Cultural Industries’,
Art, Design and Communication in Higher Education, 7.1: 5-18
— 2011. ‘Communities, Values, Conventions and Actions’, in Biggs and
Karlsson (eds), pp. 82-98
Biggs, Michael A.R., and Henrik Karlsson (eds). 2011. The Routledge
Companion to Research in the Arts (London: Routledge)
Bippus, Elke (ed.). 2009. Kunst des Forschens: Praxis eines ästhetischen
Denkens (Zurich: Diaphanes)
Bippus, Elke. 2011. ‘An Aestheticization of Artistic Research’, Texte zur
Kunst (special issue, Artistic Research), 20.82: 98-104

244

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 245

Boomgaard, Jeroen. 2012. ‘Het zoeken van regels die niet bestaan’, in
Denken in kunst: Theorie en reflectie in het kunstonderwijs, ed. by
Henk Borgdorff and Peter Sonderen (Leiden: Leiden University
Press, forthcoming)
Borgdorff, Henk. 1998a. ‘Holismus, Wahrheit, Realismus: Adornos Musikphilosophie aus amerikanischer Sicht’, in Mit den Ohren denken: Adornos Philosophie der Musik, ed. by Richard Klein and
Claus-S. Mahnkopf (Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp), pp. 294320
— 1998b. ‘Solidarität mit Metaphysik nach ihrem Sturz: Einige Bemerkungen anläßlich Albrecht Wellmers Adorno-Lektüre’, in Das gebrochene Glücksversprechen: Zur Dialektik des Harmonischen in der
Musik, ed. by Otto Kolleritsch, Studien zur Wertungsforschung,
33 (Vienna: Universal Edition), pp. 80-103
Borgdorff, Henk, and Michiel Schuijer. 2010. ‘Research in the Conservatoire’, Dissonanz: Swiss Music Journal for Research and Creation, 110: 14-19
Busch, Kathrin. 2011. ‘Generating Knowledge in the Arts: A Philosophical Daydream’, Texte zur Kunst (special issue, Artistic Research), 20.82: 70-79
Bush, Vannevar. 1945. Science: The Endless Frontier (Washington dc: National Science Foundation)
Caduff, Corina, Fiona Siegenthaler, and Tan Wälchli (eds). 2009. Art
and Artistic Research: Music, Visual Art, Design, Literature, Dance,
Zurich Yearbook of the Arts, 6 (Zurich: Scheidegger und Spiess).
Also in German in the same volume.
Candlin, Fiona. 2000a. ‘Practice-Based Doctorates and Questions of
Academic Legitimacy’, International Journal of Art and Design Education (jade), 19.1: 96-101
— 2000b. ‘A Proper Anxiety? Practice-Based PhDs and Academic Unease’, Working Papers in Art and Design, 1 <http://www.herts.ac.
uk/artdes1/research/papers/wpades/vol1/candlin2full.html> [accessed 2 January 2011]
— 2001. ‘A Dual Inheritance: The Politics of Educational Reform and
PhDs in Art and Design’, The International Journal of Art and Design Education (jade), 20.3: 302-10

245

Bibliography

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 246

Carr, David. 1978. ‘Practical Reasoning and Knowing How’, Journal of
Human Movement Studies, 4: 3-20
— 1999. ‘Art, Practical Knowledge and Aesthetic Objectivity’, Ratio,
12.3: 240-56
Carter, Paul. 2004. Material Thinking (Melbourne: Melbourne University Press)
Cavell, Stanley. 1979. The Claim of Reason (Oxford: Oxford University
Press)
— 1996. ‘The Ordinary as the Uneventful’, in The Cavell Reader, ed.
by Stephen Mullhall (Oxford: Blackwell), pp. 253-59
Cobussen, Marcel. 2007. ‘The Trojan Horse: Epistemological Explorations Concerning Practice-Based Research’, Dutch Journal of
Music Theory (special issue, Practice-Based Research in Music),
12.1: 18-33
Coessens, Kathleen, Anne Douglas, and Darla Crispin. 2009. The
Artistic Turn: A Manifesto, Orpheus Research Centre in Music Series, 1 (Leuven: Leuven University Press)
Dallow, Peter. 2003. ‘Representing Creativeness: Practice-Based Approaches to Research in the Creative Arts’, Art, Design and Communication in Higher Education, 2.1: 49-66
— 2005. ‘Outside the “True”: Research and Complexity in Contemporary Arts’, in New Practices, New Pedagogies: A Reader, ed.
by Malcolm Miles (London: Routledge), pp. 133-42
Danto, Arthur C. 1986. The Philosophical Disenfranchisement of Art
(New York: Columbia University Press)
Davies, Allan (ed.). 2002. Enhancing Curricula: Exploring Effective
Curriculum Practices in Art, Design and Communication in Higher
Education, cltad First International Conference, London, 1012 April (London: Centre for Learning and Teaching in Art and
Design / London Institute)
Dijkgraaf, Robbert. 2007. Interview by Annette W. Balkema and Henk
Slager. Mahkuzine: Journal of Artistic Research, 2: 31-37
Dombois, Florian, Ute Meta Bauer, Claudia Mareis, and Michael
Schwab (eds). 2011. Intellectual Birdhouse: Artistic Practice as Research (London: Koenig Books)

246

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 247

Dreyfus, Hubert L. 1982. Husserl, Intentionality and Cognitive Science
(Cambridge, ma: mit Press)
— 2005. ‘Overcoming the Myth of the Mental: How Philosophers Can
Profit from the Phenomenology of Everyday Expertise’, Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical Association,
79: 47-65
— 2007a. ‘Response to McDowell’, Inquiry, 50.4: 371-77
— 2007b. ‘The Return of the Myth of the Mental’, Inquiry, 50.4: 352-65
Dyrssen, Catharina. 2011. ‘jar: A New Journal for Artistic Research’,
in Form och Färdriktning: Strategiska frågor för den konstnärliga
forskningen, Årsbok KFoU 2011 [Yearbook for Artistic Research
and Development] (Stockholm: Swedish Research Council),
pp. 89-91
Eisner, Elliot W. 2003. ‘On the Differences between Scientific and Artistic Approaches to Qualitative Research’, Visual Arts Research,
29.57: 5-11 (original in Educational Researcher, 10.4 (1981): 5-9)
Elkins, James (ed.). 2009. Artists with PhDs: On the New Doctoral Degree in Studio Art (Washington dc: New Academia)
Frayling, Christopher. 1993. Research in Art and Design, Royal College
of Art Research Papers series, 1.1 (London: Royal College of Art)
— 2006. ‘Foreword’, in Macleod and Holdridge (eds), pp. xii-xiv
Friedman, Ken. 2002. ‘Design Curriculum Challenges for Today’s
University’, in Davies (ed.), pp. 27-63
Gardner, Howard. 1985. Frames of Mind (New York: Basic Books)
Gehm, Sabine, Pirkko Husemann, and Katharina von Wilcke (eds).
2007. Wissen in Bewegung: Perspektiven der künstlerischen und wissenschaftlichen Forschung im Tanz (Bielefeld: Transcript)
Geimer, Peter. ‘Das große Recherche-Getue in der Kunst: Sollen Hochschulen “Master of Arts”-Titel und Doktorhüte für Malerei verleihen?’, Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, 20 April 2011, Forschung und Lehre section, p. N5 <http://www.hkb.bfh.ch/
uploads/media/Das_grosse_Recherche-Getue_in_der_Kunst.
pdf> [accessed 12 January 2011]
Gibbons, Michael, and others. 1994. The New Production of Knowledge:
The Dynamics of Science and Research in Contemporary Societies
(London: Sage)

247

Bibliography

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 248

Gieryn, Thomas F. 1983. ‘Boundary Work and the Demarcation of Science from Non-Science’, American Sociological Review, 48: 781-95
Gosselin, Pierre, and Éric le Coguiec (eds). 2006. La Recherche création:
Pour une compréhension de la recherche en pratique artistique
(Québec: Presses de l’Université du Québec)
Gray, Carole, and Julian Malins. 2004. Visualizing Research: A Guide
to the Research Process in Art and Design (Aldershot: Ashgate)
Gunther, York H. 2003. Essays on Nonconceptual Content (Cambridge,
ma: mit Press)
Habermas, Jürgen. 2009. ‘Die Einheit der Vernunft in der Vielheit ihrer
Stimmen’, in Jürgen Habermas, Kritik der Vernunft, Philosophische
Texte, 5 (Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp), pp. 117-55
Hannula, Mika, Juha Suoranta, and Tere Vadén. 2005. Artistic Research:
Theories, Methods, Practices (Helsinki: Academy of Fine Arts;
Gothenburg: University of Gothenburg)
Haseman, Brad. 2006. ‘A Manifesto for Performative Research’, Media
International Australia incorporating Culture and Policy (special issue, Practice-Led Research), 118: 98-106
Hegel, Georg W. F. 1975. Aesthetics: Lectures on Fine Art [delivered 18171829], trans. by T. M. Knox, 2 vols (Oxford: Clarendon Press).
In German, Vorlesungen über die Aesthetik, 3 vols (Frankfurt am
Main: Suhrkamp, 1986)
Heidegger, Martin. 1976. ‘Nur noch ein Gott kann uns retten’ [in conversation with Rudolf Augstein and Georg Wolff on 23 September 1966], Der Spiegel, 30.23 (31 May), pp. 193-219. The entire conversation in Antwort: Martin Heidegger im Gespräch, ed.
by Günther Neske and Emil Kettering (Pfullingen: Neske, 1988),
pp. 81-111
Hockey, John. 2005. ‘Practice-Based Research Degree Students in Art
and Design: Identity and Adaptation’, International Journal of Art
and Design Education (jade), 22.1: 82-91
Hockey, John, and Jacqueline Allen-Collinson. 2000. ‘The Supervision
of Practice-Based Research Degrees in Art and Design’, International Journal of Art and Design Education (jade), 19.3: 345-55
Kant, Immanuel. 1978 [1790/93]. The Critique of Judgement, trans. by
James Creed Meredith (Oxford: Clarendon Press). German orig-

248

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 249

inal Kritik der Urteilskraft, ed. by Karl Vorländer (Hamburg:
Meiner, 1974 [1913])
— 1974 [1793]. On the Old Saw: That May Be Right in Theory but It
Won’t Work in Practice, trans. by E. B. Ashton, intro. by George
Miller (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press). German original ‘Ueber den Gemeinspruch: Das mag in der Theorie richtig sein, taugt aber nicht für die Praxis’, Berlinische Monatschrift, 2 (September 1793): 201-84 <http://www.ub.unibielefeld.de/diglib/Berlinische_Monatsschrift/index-e.htm> [accessed 26 January 2012]
Kessels, Jos, and Fred Korthagen. 2001. ‘The Relation between Theory
and Practice: Back to the Classics’, in Linking Practice and Theory, ed. by F. A. J. Korthagen and others (New York: Routledge),
pp. 20-31
Kiverstein, Julian, and Andy Clark. 2009. ‘Introduction: Mind Embodied, Embedded, Enacted: One Church or Many?’, Topoi, 28:
1-7
Kjørup, Søren. 2006. Another Way of Knowing, Sensuous Knowledge series, 1 (Bergen: Bergen National Academy of the Arts)
— 2011. ‘Pleading for Plurality: Artistic and Other Kinds of Research’,
in Biggs and Karlsson (eds), pp. 24-43
Knorr Cetina, Karin. 1999. Epistemic Cultures: How the Sciences Make
Knowledge (Cambridge, ma: Harvard University Press)
— 2001. ‘Objectual Practice’, in Schatzki, Knorr Cetina, and von Savigny
(eds), pp. 175-88
Knowles, J. Gary, and Ardra L. Coles (eds). 2008. Handbook of the Arts
in Qualitative Research (London: Sage)
Kristeller, Paul O. 1951/52. ‘The Modern System of the Arts: A Study in
the History of Aesthetics’, parts 1 and 2, Journal of the History of
Ideas, 12.4 (October 1951): 496-527, and 13.1 (January 1952): 17-46
Latour, Bruno. 1988. Science in Action: How to Follow Scientists and Engineers in Society (Cambridge, ma: Harvard University Press)
— 1999. Pandora’s Hope: Essays on the Reality of Science Studies (Cambridge, ma: Harvard University Press)
Latour, Bruno, and Steven Woolgar. 1986. Laboratory Life: The Construction of Scientific Facts (Princeton: Princeton University Press)

249

Bibliography

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 250

Luntley, Michael. 2003. ‘Non-Conceptual Content and the Sound of
Music’, Mind and Language, 18.4: 402-26
Macleod, Katy, and Lin Holdridge (eds). 2006. Thinking through Art:
Reflections on Art as Research (London: Routledge)
McDowell, John. 2007a. ‘Response to Dreyfus’, Inquiry, 50.4: 366-70
— 2007b. ‘What Myth?’, Inquiry, 50.4: 338-51
Mersch, Dieter. 2009. ‘Kunst als epistemische Praxis’, in Bippus (ed.),
pp. 27-47
Mersch, Dieter, and Michaela Ott (eds). 2007. Kunst und Wissenschaft
(Munich: Wilhelm Fink)
Nelson, Robin, and Stuart Andrews. 2003. ‘Practice as Research: Regulations, Protocols and Guidelines’ [including ‘Draft “Best Practice” Guidelines on PaR PhDs’ and ‘Ten Steps to a “Perfect” PaR
PhD’] (Lancaster: palatine) <http:// 78.158.56.101/archive/pala
tine/files/903.pdf> [accessed 5 January 2012]
Nevanlinna, Tuomas. 2004. ‘Is Artistic Research a Meaningful Concept?’, in Artistic Research, ed. by Annette W. Balkema and Henk
Slager, Lier en Boog: Series of Philosophy of Art and Art Theory, 18: 80-83
Noë, Alva. 2004. Action in Perception (Cambridge, ma: mit Press)
Nowotny, Helga. 2011. ‘Foreword’, in Biggs and Karlsson (eds), pp. xviixxvi
Nowotny, Helga, Peter Scott, and Michael Gibbons. 2001. Re-thinking
Science: Knowledge and the Public in an Age of Uncertainty (Cambridge: Polity Press)
— 2003. ‘“Mode 2” Revisited: The New Production of Knowledge’,
Minerva, 41: 179-94
Pakes, Anna. 2003. ‘Original Embodied Knowledge: The Epistemology
of the New in Dance Practice as Research’, Research in Dance Education, 4.2: 127-49
— 2004. ‘Art as Action or Art as Object? The Embodiment of Knowledge in Practice as Research’, Working Papers in Art and Design,
3 <http://www.herts.ac.uk/artdes1/research/papers/wpades/vol3/
apfull.html> [accessed 4 January 2012]
Parviainen, Jaana. 2002. ‘Bodily Knowledge: Epistemological Reflections on Dance’, Dance Research Journal, 34.1: 11-22

250

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 251

Polanyi, Michael. 1958. Personal Knowledge: Towards a Post-Critical
Philosophy (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul)
— 1966. The Tacit Dimension (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul)
Porter, James I. 2009. ‘Is Art Modern? Kristeller’s “Modern System of the
Arts” Reconsidered’, British Journal of Aesthetics, 49.1: 1-24
Putnam, Hilary. 1990. Realism with a Human Face (Cambridge, ma:
Harvard University Press)
— 1995. Pragmatism (Oxford: Blackwell)
— 2002. The Collapse of the Fact/Value Dichotomy and Other Essays
(Cambridge, ma: Harvard University Press)
Rey, Anton, and Stefan Schöbi (eds). 2009. Künstlerische Forschung: Positionen und Perspektiven (Zurich: Institute for the Performing
Arts and Film, Zurich University of the Arts)
Rheinberger, Hans-Jörg. 1992. Experiment, Differenz, Schrift: Zur Geschichte epistemischer Dinge (Marburg an der Lahn: BasilikenPresse)
— 2004. ‘Experimental Systems’, The Virtual Laboratory <http://
vlp.mpiwg-berlin.mpg.de/essays/data/enc19?p=1> [accessed 5
January 2012]
— 2005. Iterationen (Berlin: Merve Verlag)
— 2006a. Experimentalsysteme und epistemische Dinge: Eine Geschichte
der Proteinsynthese im Reagenzglas (Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp). Earlier version originally published as Toward a History
of Epistemic Things: Synthesizing Proteins in the Test Tube (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1997). Dual page references in the
text refer respectively to the German and English versions (which
may slightly differ).
— 2006b. ‘Über die Kunst, das Unbekannte zu erforschen’ (Wollerau,
CH: Cogito Foundation) <http://www.cogito foundation.ch/
pdf/2006/061025DieKunst_dasUnbekannte.pdf> [accessed 5 January 2012]. Also published as ‘Man weiss nicht genau, was man
nicht weiss. Über die Kunst, das Unbekannte zu erforschen’,
Neue Zürcher Zeitung (nzz Online), 5 May 2007, p. B3 <http:
//www.theologie.uzh.ch/faecher/neues-testament/rueegger/
qvu-dokumentation/Rheinberger07.pdf> [accessed 5 January
2012]

251

Bibliography

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 252

— 2007. Historische Epistemologie zur Einführung (Hamburg: Junius)
— 2008. ‘Epistemische Dinge, technische Dinge’ , video recording,
58:57, of lecture at Bochum Media Science Colloquium, 2 July
<http://vimeo.com/2351486> [accessed 5 January 2012]
— 2010. An Epistemology of the Concrete: Twentieth-Century Histories of
Life (Durham, nc, and London: Duke University Press)
Rietveld, Erik. 2008. ‘Unreflective Action: A Philosophical Contribution to Integrative Neuroscience’ (PhD thesis, Institute for
Logic, Language and Computation, University of Amsterdam)
Riley, Shannon Rose, and Lynette Hunter (eds). 2009. Mapping Landscapes
for Performance as Research (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan)
Ritterman, Janet, Gerald Bast, and Jürgen Mittelstraß (eds). 2011.
Kunst und Forschung: Können Künstler Forscher sein? (Vienna:
Springer)
Rouse, Joseph. 2001. ‘Two Concepts of Practice’, in Schatzki, Knorr
Cetina, and von Savigny (eds), pp. 189-98
— 2002. ‘Vampires: Social Constructivism, Realism, and Other Philosophical Undead’, History and Theory, 41: 60-78
Rubidge, Sarah. 2005. ‘Artists in the Academy: Reflections on Artistic
Practice as Research’ <http://ausdance.org.au/ articles/details/
artists-in-the-academy-reflections-on-artistic-practice-as-research> [accessed 5 January 2012]
Ryle, Gilbert. 1949. The Concept of Mind (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press)
Säätelä, Simo. 2005. ‘Aesthetic Experience and “Non-Conceptual”
Content’, in Perspectives on Aesthetics, Art and Culture: Essays in
Honour of Lars-Olof Åhlberg, ed. by C. Entzenberg and S. Säätelä
(Stockholm: Thales), pp. 292-312
Schatzki, Theodor R., Karin Knorr Cetina, and Eike von Savigny
(eds). 2001. The Practice Turn in Contemporary Theory (London:
Routledge)
Schön, Donald. 1982. The Reflective Practitioner: How Professionals
Think in Action (New York: Basic Books)
Schwab, Michael. 2011a. ‘Editorial’, Journal for Artistic Research, 0
<http://www.jar-online.net/index.php/issues/editorial/480> [accessed 4 January 2012]

252

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 253

— 2011b. ‘Editorial’, Journal for Artistic Research, 1 <http://www.jar-on
line.net/index.php/issues/editorial/483> [accessed 4 January 2012]
Shapin, Steven, and Simon Schaffer. 1989. Leviathan and the AirPump: Hobbes, Boyle, and the Experimental Life (Princeton:
Princeton University Press)
Stokes, Donald E. 1997. Pasteur’s Quadrant: Basic Science and Technological Innovation (Washington dc: Brookings Institution Press)
Sullivan, Graeme. 2005. Art Practice as Research: Inquiry into the Visual
Arts (London: Sage)
Taylor, Charles. 2005. ‘Merleau-Ponty and the Epistemological Picture’,
in The Cambridge Companion to Merleau-Ponty, ed. by T. Carman and M. B. N. Hansen (London: Cambridge University
Press), pp. 26-49
Thomson, Peter. 2003. ‘Practice as Research’, Studies in Theatre and Performance, 22.3: 159-80
Tröndle, Martin, and Julia Warmers (eds). 2011. Kunstforschung als ästhetische Wissenschaft: Beiträge zur transdisziplinären Hybridisierung von Wissenschaft und Kunst (Bielefeld: Transcript)
Wehling, Peter. 2006. ‘The Situated Materiality of Scientific Practices: Postconstructivism – A New Theoretical Perspective in Science Studies?’ Science, Technology and Innovation Studies (Special
Issue, 1): 81-100
Wesseling, Janneke (ed.). 2011. See It Again, Say It Again: The Artist as
Researcher (Amsterdam: Valiz)
Whitley, Richard. 2000. The Intellectual and Social Organization of the
Sciences (Oxford: Oxford University Press)
Wilson, Stephen. 2002. Information Arts: Intersections of Art, Science and
Technology (Cambridge, ma: mit Press/Leonardo Books)
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. 1958. Philosophical Investigations, 2nd edn (Oxford: Basil Blackwell)
Zijlmans, Kitty, Robert Zwijnenberg, and Krien Clevis (eds). 2007. coops: Exploring New Territories in Art and Science (Amsterdam: De
Buitenkant)

253

Bibliography

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 254

Policy documents and other sources
aec 2007 European Association of Conservatoires, Polifonia Research
Working Group <http://www.polifonia-tn.org/Content.aspx?
id=1919> [accessed 5 January 2012]
ahrb 2003 Arts and Humanities Research Board. ‘The rae and Research in the Creative and Performing Arts’ [no longer publicly
accessible]
ahrc 2007 Arts and Humanities Research Council. Beyond Text: Performances, Sounds, Images, Objects <http://www.ahrc.ac.uk/
FundingOpportunities/Pages/BeyondText.aspx> [accessed 5 January 2012]
ahrc (n.d.) Arts and Humanities Research Council. Fellowships in the
Creative and Performing Arts <http://www.ahrc.ac.uk/Funding
Opportunities/Pages/fcpa.aspx> [accessed 5 January 2012]
air Artists in Residence, Art Practice and Development Research
Group, Amsterdam School of the Arts (ahk) <http://www.
ahk.nl/en/research-groups/art-practice/artists-in-residence/> [accessed 8 February 2012]
aka 2007 Suomen Akatemia (Academy of Finland). Research in Art and
Design in Finnish Universities <http://www.aka.fi/Tiedostot/
Tiedostot/Julkaisut/04_09%20Research%20in%20Art%20and
%20Design.pdf> [accessed 5 January 2012]
anma 2009 Association of Nordic Music Academies. Annual meeting,
Research and Artistic Work, Copenhagen, 5 February <http://
www.nkinfo.org/annual-2009.html> [accessed 5 January 2012]
arc 2010 Artistic Research Catalogue <http://www.kabk.nl/pageEN.
php?id=0485> [accessed 5 January 2012]
arp 2010 Project: Artistic Research, Stichting Innovatie Alliantie
<http://innovatie-alliantie.nl/projectenbank/raak-project/724artistic-research.html> [accessed 13 February 2012]
atr 2006 The Anatomical Theatre Revisited, conference held at Amsterdam, 5-8 April <http://www.anatomicaltheatrerevisited. com>
[accessed 13 February 2012]
awt 2005 Adviesraad voor het Wetenschaps- en Technologiebeleid
(Advisory Council for Science and Technology Policy). Ontwerp

254

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 255

en ontwikkeling. De functie en plaats van onderzoeksactiviteiten in
hogescholen (The Hague: awt) <http://www.awt.nl/uploads/fi
les///Adviezen/a65.pdf> [accessed 5 January 2012]
bauhaus Bauhaus-Universität Weimar. Promotionsstudiengang Kunst
und Design/Freie Kunst <http://www.uni-weimar.de/gestal
tung/studiengaenge/promotion-phd-drphil/> [accessed 5 January
2012]
cc Choreography and Cognition <http://www.choreocog.net/> [accessed 8 February 2012]
deetya 1998 Research in the Creative Arts, by Dennis Strand (Canberra:
Evaluations and Investigations Programme, Higher Education Division, Department of Employment, Education, Training and
Youth Affairs) <http://www.dest.gov.au/archive/highered/eippubs/
eip98-6/eip98-6.pdf> [accessed 29 January 2012]
des 2002 Department for Education and Skills. Review of Arts and Humanities Research Funding: Report of the Steering Group to Education Ministers <http://www.education.gov.uk/consultations/
downloadableDocs/SOR_143_1.doc> [accessed 7 February 2012]
Docartes Doctoral Programme in Musical Arts <http://www.doc
artes.be/en/welcome> [accessed 5 January 2012]
elia 2008 European League of Institutes of the Arts. The Importance
of Artistic Research and its Contribution to ‘New Knowledge’ in a
Creative Europe. Strategy Paper <http://www.elia-artschools.
org/images/products/13/research_paper_08.pdf> [accessed 5 January 2012]
eparm European Platform for Artistic Research in Music, European
Association of Conservatoires <http://www.aecinfo.org/Con
tent.aspx?id=2279> [accessed 5 January 2012]
fwo Fonds Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek – Vlaanderen (Research
Foundation – Flanders). Cult2: Arts and Literature <http://
www. fwo.be/Panel-Kunsten-en-literatuur.aspx> [accessed 5 January 2012]
fwf Wissenschaftsfonds fwf (Austrian Science Fund). Österreichische
Systematik der Wissenschaftszweige <http://www. statistik.at/
kdb/downloads/pdf/OEFOS2002_EN_CAL_20070226_00000
0.pdf> [accessed 5 January 2012]

255

Bibliography

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 256

gos 2009 Regeringskansliet (Government Offices of Sweden). Doctoral Level Studies in the Fine and Applied Arts <http://www.
sweden.gov.se/sb/d/574/a/123213> [accessed 7 February 2012]
ja 2009 Die junge Akademie. Erster Salon Kunst und Wissenschaft,
Berlin, 20 June <http://www.diejungeakademie.de/pdf/Pro
gramm-KaF_20-6-09.pdf> [accessed 5 January 2012]
jar Journal for Artistic Research <http://www.jar-online.net> [accessed
5 January 2012]
jqi 2004 Joint Quality Initiative. Dublin Descriptors <http://www.joint
quality.nl/content/descriptors/CompletesetDublinDescriptors.
doc> [accessed 10 February 2012]
kfh 2008 Rektorenkonferenz der Fachhochschulen der Schweiz. Forschung an Schweizer Kunsthochschulen 2008: Bericht und Empfehlungen <http://www.kfh.ch/content/stable.cfm?stb=126&
trg=1> [accessed 7 February 2012]
knaw Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen (Royal
Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences) <http://www.
knaw.nl/> [accessed 5 January 2012]
leru League of European Research Universities <http://www.leru.org>
[accessed 5 January 2012]
leuven 2009 Communiqué of the Conference of European Ministers
Responsible for Higher Education, Leuven and Louvain-la-Neuve,
28-29 April <http://europa.eu/rapid/pressReleases Action.do?ref
erence=IP/09/675&format=HTML&aged=0& language=EN>
[accessed 5 January 2012]
money 2007 Money (f )or the Arts. Rektoren der Österreichischen
Kunstuniversitäten <http://www.reko.ac.at/upload/MONEY
_%28F%29OR_THE_ARTS.pdf> [accessed 5 January 2012]
narf Program for kunstnerisk utviklingsarbeid (National Norwegian
Artistic Research Fellowship Programme) <http://www.kunst
stipendiat.no/en> [accessed 5 January 2012]
nasm 2010 National Association of Schools of Music [usa]. nasm
Handbook <http://nasm.arts-accredit.org/index.jsp?page= Stan
dards-Handbook> [accessed 5 January 2012]
nesti Working Party of National Experts on Science and Technology
Indicators. Revised Field of Science and Technology (fos) Classifi-

256

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 257

cation in the Frascati Manual <http://www.oecd.org/data
oecd/36/44/38235147.pdf> [accessed 5 January 2012]
nwo Nederlandse Organisatie voor Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek
(Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research) <http://
www.nwo.nl> [accessed 5 January 2012]
oecd 2002 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. Frascati Manual: Proposed Standard Practice for Surveys on
Research and Experimental Development <http://browse.oecd
bookshop.org/oecd/pdfs/free/9202081e.pdf> [accessed 7 February 2012]
öwr 2008 Österreichischer Wissenschaftsrat (Austrian Science Board).
Tagung ‘Kunst und Forschung’ (Art and Research Conference),
4 December <http://www.wissenschaftsrat.ac.at/news/Programm
_Tagung%20Kunst%20und%20Forschung.pdf> [accessed 5 January 2012]
öwr 2009 Österreichischer Wissenschaftsrat (Austrian Science Board).
Empfehlung zur Entwicklung der Kunstuniversitäten in Österreich
<http://www.wissenschaftsrat.ac.at/dokumente.html> [accessed
5 January 2012]
palatine Performing Arts Learning and Teaching Innovation Network
<http://www.palatine.ac.uk/> [accessed 5 January 2012]
parip Practice as Research in Performance <http://www.bris.ac.uk/
parip/> [accessed 13 February 2012]
parip list Practice as Research in Performance mailing list <https://
www.jiscmail.ac.uk/cgi-bin/webadmin?A0=PARIP> [accessed 13
February 2012]
peek 2009 Wissenschaftsfonds fwf (Austrian Science Fund). Programm zur Entwicklung und Erschließung der Künste (peek): Programmdokument <http://www.fwf.ac.at/de/ projects/peek.html>
[accessed 5 January 2012]
PhD-Design PhD-Design mailing list <https://www.jiscmail.ac.uk/
cgi-bin/webadmin?A0=PHD-DESIGN> [accessed 5 January 2012]
r2p Research into Practice Conferences, Centre for Research into Practice, School of Creative Arts, University of Hertfordshire
<http://sitem.herts.ac.uk/artdes_research/res2prac/confhome.
html> [accessed 5 January 2012]

257

Bibliography

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 258

rae 2005 Research Assessment Exercise. ‘rae 2008: Guidance on
Submissions’ <http://www.rae.ac.uk/pubs/2005/03/rae0305.pdf>
[accessed 5 January 2012]
ref Research Excellence Framework. ‘Assessment Framework and
Guidance on Submissions’ <http://www.hefce.ac.uk/research/
ref/pubs/2011/02_11/> [accessed 5 January 2012]
rti Research Training Initiative, Birmingham Institute of Art and Design <http://www.biad.bcu.ac.uk/research/rti/> [accessed 5 January 2012]
sar Society for Artistic Research <www.jar-online.net> [accessed 5 January 2012]
share Step-Change for Higher Arts Research Education (elia/ Gradcam) <http://www.sharenetwork.eu/> [accessed 5 January 2012]
sk Sensuous Knowledge conferences <http://sensuousknowledge.
org/> [accessed 5 January 2012]
src 2009 Vetenskapsrådet (Swedish Research Council). ‘Konstnärlig
forskning inför framtiden’ (Artistic Research in the Future), conference held at Stockholm, 12-13 March <http://www.vr.se/hu
vudmeny/pressochnyheter/nyhetsarkiv/nyheter2009/konferen
somkonstnarligforskning.5.ead945b11f699b508580006013.html>
[accessed 5 January 2012]
udk Universität der Künste Berlin (Berlin University of the Arts). Projekt Graduiertenschule <http://www.udk-berlin.de/sites/grad
uiertenschule/content/index_ger.htlm> [accessed 5 January 2012]
ukcge 1997 UK Council for Graduate Education. Practice-Based Doctorates in the Creative and Performing Arts and Design, by Christopher Frayling [no longer publicly accessible]
ukcge 2001 UK Council for Graduate Education. Research Training
in the Creative and Performing Arts and Design [no longer publicly accessible]
unesco 1979 ‘Recommendation concerning the International Standardization of Statistics on Science and Technology’, in Records of
the General Conference, 20th Session, Paris, 24 October-28 November 1978. Volume 1: Resolutions (20C/Resolutions 15.1), Annex
1 (Paris: unesco), pp. 23-35 <http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/
0011/001140/114032e.pdf#page=188> [accessed 5 January 2012]

258

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 259

zhdk 2009 Zürcher Hochschule der Künste (Zurich University of the
Arts). ‘The Difference of Art and Art Research across the Disciplines’, conference held at Zurich, 23-24 April <http://www.
zhdk.ch/fileadmin/data_zhdk/hochschule/Rektorat/Transdiszi
plinaeres_Atelier/ArtResearch_ZHdK_April09.pdf> [accessed 5
January 2012]

259

Bibliography

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 260

Index

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 261

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 262

absolute, the: in Schelling 48; in Hegel
136
abstract(ness): artistic products 211;
modernist 135; music 93; quality of
art 71, 171, 195n14, 206
academia: the term 32, 61n2, 149,
149n7; (self-)understanding of 4, 9,
44, 69, 72-73, 118, 183, 187, 210,
236; reconfiguration,
transformation of 12; 17, 118, 240;
modified, enriched, enhanced,
broader, open conception of 44, 59,
60-61, 109, 160n14, 203, 208-09,
221, 232-33; uneasy relationship to
9, 56-73, 143, 143n1, 203;
opposition, resistance, aversion to,
reservations, scepticism towards 45, 82, 107, 117-18, 209, 221;
opposition, resistance from,
scepticism in 53, 61-62, 209;
departure from 21, 233; confines,
walls, boundaries, borders of 32,
132, 210, 143, 177, 206-07, 232;
boundaries within 177; and other
life domains 8, 9, 51, 92; and art
world 33, 91, 117, 132, 177, 221, 223;
and artistic development see artistic
development
academic advance/drift 32, 83, 90, 117
academic forum 55, 85, 165, 167, 207,
210
academisation 5, 31, 31n1, 60, 117
academism 60, 117
academy 18-26, 31, 32, 108, 124-25, 151
see also academia; radical 73; design
see design

262

The Conflict of the Faculties

accountability 25, 81, 89-90, 93-94
acquaintance 163
action research see research
actor-network theory 133, 150, 176, 182,
188n1, 217
admission procedures 63, 124, 167
Adorno, Theodor W. 4, 20, 21, 48, 69,
82, 123, 130, 137, 142, 152, 153-54,
154n10, 194
aesthetic(s) 21, 38, 45, 46, 47-48, 123,
134-35, 144, 151-54, 197, 203;
distance 100, 171; of music 63;
Hegel’s lectures on 135-36;
relational 165; of early
Romanticism 135, 137, 162n16, 171
agency 2, 10, 217
agenda 17, 44, 59, 69; research 93, 150,
170, 178-79; unesco conference 77
Allegue, Ludivine 112
Allen-Collinson, Jacqueline 53
analogon rationis 48, 152
analysis: work, production, reception 19,
24, 207; qualitative/quantitative 51,
84, 154, 155; cultural see cultural
analysis; musical see musical analysis
Andrews, Stuart 22n2
anthropology 9; visual 44; social 51
application 99, 160; applied research see
research; context of see context;
funding see funding
apprehension 122, 163
architecture, architects 34, 95, 134, 157;
design 101, 119; theory 150; schools
35, 157
Aristotle 47, 97, 163
art, artwork, art practice 41, 45, 145,

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 263

207, 223; status, concept, nature,
identity of 4, 9, 82, 87, 101, 117,
118, 132, 133, 146, 187, 180-81, 183,
221; ambiguity of 49; end of see
end of art; knowledge, content,
thinking embodied in 17 21, 24, 71,
151, 164, 189, 206; fundamental 91;
minimalist 91; conceptual 71, 91,
117, 135, 193; contemporary 22, 70,
71, 154; post-historical 135; natural
law of 21, 70; visual see visual art;
system of see system of the arts; as
epistemic thing see epistemic
thing; art practice-in-itself vs art
practice-as-research 7, 33, 40, 43,
53, 144, 159, 161, 207, 230; in
research (process) 24, 38;
performative force of 20, 93;
cultural value of 48, 100, 151, 153;
materiality/immateriality of 46, 93,
147, 153, 156, 166, 172, 180, 183;
originality of see originality; as
boundary object see boundary
object; signature of 227
art criticism 4, 78, 84, 91, 94, 131, 133,
147-48, 154
art(s) education 17-26, 59-60, 116
art forum 33, 55, 85, 94, 165, 167
art history 4, 38, 52, 61, 99, 101, 121, 124,
134, 146, 150
art industry see industry
art market 118, 125, 180, 183, 229
art school, academy see academy
art-science collaboration 3, 92, 114, 15859
art theory 4, 131

263

Index

art world 3-4, 41, 131, 223, 236; artistic
universe 42, 80, 161; and academia
see academia; context of 94, 121,
148, 165, 177, 180, 203, 208;
margins of 93; and peer review 94,
133, 165; scepticism in see academia;
success in 233; (self-)understanding
of 236, 240
articulation 2, 11-12, 20, 24, 39, 45, 48,
69, 72, 100, 122, 137, 143, 153, 166,
171, 189, 193, 206, 218, 234-35, 24041
artificial intelligence 49, 158
artist-researcher 50-52, 94, 123, 133, 151,
179, 207, 212, 222, 226, 235, 239
artistic development 51, 80, 85, 117, 126,
143-44, 155, 161
artistic doctorate see doctorate
artistic real 195, 207
artistic reasoning see reason
artistic universe see art world
artistry 6, 52, 82, 151 see also skills, craft
arts-based research see research
assessment: research assessment 8, 11,
36, 41-43. 85, 89, 94, 124, 166, 167,
200-13, 222-23; framework 8, 10, 11,
43, 212-13, 231-39; of quality 32, 55,
68, 86-87, 94-95, 133, 178-79, 187,
229; committees 26; of journal
submissions 218, 222, 227-40;
procedures in education 63, 124; by
peers 8, 68, 88, 122, 165, 207 see also
peer review; funding see funding;
criteria, standards, guidelines see
criteria
atelier 143, 146, 146n5, 157

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 264

Augstein, Rudolf 129n
autobiographical narrative 155
autonomy: of artistic research 45; of art
4, 70, 133-35; of scientific research
90;
avant-garde, historical 46, 117
Bachelard, Gaston 195n13
Bal, Mieke 150
Barrett, Estelle 112
basic scientific research see research
Bast, Gerald 112
Batteux, Charles 134
Bauer, Ute Meta 22n2
Bauhaus 149
Baumgarten, Alexander G. 21, 47-48,
134, 151-53, 210, 219
beauty 45, 91, 100, 101, 133, 153
Becker, Howard 133
behavioural science see science
Beuys, Joseph 191
Biggs, Michael A.R. 7, 46n16, 112, 147,
156n11, 160n14, 163, 188n1, 218n1
binary system 31, 35, 116
BioArt 158, 189n2
biology 78, 188; biotechnology 79, 95,
158; biomedical science see science;
biophysics 83; biochemistry 78;
microbiology 98; molecular biology
51, 188, 189-90
Bippus, Elke 4n1, 112
Bohr, Niels 99
Bologna 25, 35, 42n14, 58, 59, 65, 88,
116-17, 230
Bolt, Barbara 112
Boomgaard, Jeroen 18

264

The Conflict of the Faculties

Borgdorff, Henk 18, 124, 154n10, 220
boundaries/borders 9, 143, 157, 177-83,
191, 206-07, 222, 232
boundary work 129-38, 174-83, 206;
boundary object 177, 223
Bourdieu, Pierre 131, 133
Büchler, Daniela 156n11, 160n14
Bürger, Peter 70
Busch, Kathrin 4n1
Bush, Vannevar 87, 89, 96
Caduff, Corina 112, 220n6
Cage, John 191, 192
Candlin, Fiona 54, 143n1
Carr, David 47
Carter, Paul 111, 117, 183
Cavell, Stanley 142, 171
chance 80, 162, 165
choreography 49, 92
Clark, Andy 152n9
classification 8, 39, 40, 52n19, 121 see
also field(s) of science and
technology
Clevis, Krien 3, 158
Cobussen, Marcel 61n3
Coessens, Kathleen 112
cognition, cognitive 17, 24, 48-49, 95,
119, 156, 161, 163, 234; non-cognitive
48; science/psychology 26, 44, 4849, 68, 123, 145, 150, 152n9, 156, 169,
170, 188
Coguiec, Éric le 111
coherentism 163
Coles, Andra L. 156
composer, composition 34, 62
comprehension 17, 122, 163

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 265

conceptual 17, 47, 145n4, 171, 195n14;
non-conceptual 47-49, 69, 72, 138,
145, 145n4, 147n6, 148-50, 151-54,
163, 164, 166, 168-73, 181, 194, 206,
210, 234; concept of research,
science, knowledge see research,
science, knowledge; conceptual art
see art; conceptual framework 48,
87-88, 99, 110, 119, 150, 220n7;
conceptual mimesis see mimesis
concrete(ness) 171, 195n14
constitution 10, 20, 24, 85, 93-94, 173,
182, 195, 198, 217, 234, 236
constructivism 10, 20, 131, 163, 165, 172,
195, 210
constructivist realism 11, 17, 20, 24, 68,
72, 85, 163, 172, 176, 194-95, 198,
210, 216, 241
context 12-13, 25, 41, 45, 145-49, 165; of
application 68, 89, 91-92, 94, 119,
208, 211, 233; of discovery 59, 81, 84,
148, 158, 165-66, 188, 192, 197, 208,
211, 223, 233; of justification 59, 81,
132, 188, 197, 208, 211, 233;
academic, research 42-43, 148, 161,
165, 177, 179, 180, 203, 207-08, 211;
art world, artistic see art world; arts
education 59-60
contextualisation 19, 21, 70, 81, 234-35
contingency 10, 12, 17, 62, 70-73, 123,
130, 138, 168, 172-73, 181-82, 190,
196, 203, 204, 206
conventions 6, 22, 50, 72, 212, 229
craft 18, 19 see also skills
creative industry 118, 183
creativity 49, 82

265

Index

Crispin, Darla 112
criteria, standards, guidelines 4, 8, 11, 25,
32, 33, 39, 40, 41-43, 44, 50, 55, 68,
70, 77, 80, 156n11, 160-68, 182-83,
187, 196, 200-13, 222, 223, 227-40
critical perspective see perspective
critical rationalism 188
critical theory 19, 123, 150, 166
criticism: (art) criticism, critique, critics
see art criticism
cultural diversity 33
cultural studies, analysis, criticism 9, 19,
44, 51, 55, 62, 83, 123, 150, 151, 166
cultural value 48, 100, 151, 153
culture 21, 25, 46, 165; of knowledge,
academia, science, research 9, 12,
229, 239; material 64; grand
theories of our culture see
humanities
curator, curatorial, curating 94, 133, 221,
224, 225, 231
curiosity 83, 97, 101
cycle: empirical cycle 18, 157; action
research cycle see research, action;
third cycle see doctorate
daily life 91, 101, 131, 132, 165, 179
Dallow, Peter 22n2, 42, 162n18
dance 111, 134, 156; dance education,
school 31, 35; dance research, studies
36, 49, 150, 169n24
Danto, Arthur C. 131, 133, 135
Davies, Allan 22n2
deconstruction 19, 38, 137, 150
deduction, empirical 23, 51, 84, 154
definition: of research/artistic research

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 266

41-43, 53, 79-80, 160, 160n15, 203,
205, 208; of art 131, 183; of research
and development (Frascati) 68, 7779, 86-88, 89, 96-100, 203; of
research in UK Research
Assessment Exercise 41n13, 66,
67n7, 88, 120, 161n19; in UK
Research Excellence Framework 41;
in Dublin Descriptors 42n14, 67,
88, 121
degree: masters 25, 34, 54, 65, 107;
doctorate see doctorate, courses see
doctorate
degree-awarding power 107, 125, 187,
204
Deleuze, Gilles 5, 18, 48, 190n6
demarcation, discrimination 21, 24, 33,
39, 79, 107, 131-32, 143-44, 143n1,
150, 151, 159-68, 182-83, 187, 207,
220, 222
Derrida, Jacques 5, 21, 48, 63, 190n6
description, descriptive 38; empirical
23; thick 155
design, designer 34, 35, 88, 123, 157;
design and development 31, 84, 88,
109, 144n2; design research,
research by design see research;
doctoral design (proefontwerp) 34;
of study, research 42, 164, 209; of
documentation, publication 211-12,
228, 237-39; research into, for,
through design see research; in
definition of research 41n13, 88;
architectural design see
architecture; product design 119;
design academy 157

266

The Conflict of the Faculties

dichotomy 11n2, 23, 91, 95, 119, 132
Dijkgraaf, Robbert 81, 166
disciplinarity: multi-; inter- ; trans- ;
intra-; post- see research
disciplination 4-5, 59, 82, 178
discovery 18; context of see context;
discovery-led research see research
discursivity 10, 25, 55, 64, 122, 150, 167,
181, 182, 210, 211-12; non-discursivity
21, 42, 44, 47-49, 69, 100, 148, 152,
163, 170, 203, 206, 232, 234, 240;
discursive frame, practice, field 11,
94, 198, 217, 225, 239
dissemination see documentation and
dissemination
distance: theoretical see theoretical
distance; aesthetic see aesthetics
distribution list see field(s) of science
and technology
doctoral see also doctorate: design see
design; level 31, 55, 66, 124; research
42n14, 94; student 53
doctorate: degree 25, 34, 54-55, 69-70,
71, 107, 229; professional 54-55;
practice-based, practice-led 54-55,
62-64; artistic 34, 54; programme,
course 16, 19, 26, 34, 36, 62-66
documentation 21, 25, 41, 203, 220; and
dissemination 23, 43. 69, 91, 145,
166-67, 208, 211-12, 222, 224-25,
237-39; alternative, enhanced
modes of 44, 232, 240
Dombois, Florian 113, 219-20, 220n7
Douglas, Anne 112
Dreyfus, Hubert L. 49, 170
Dyrssen, Catharina 233

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 267

economy 81, 131, 165; economic growth
87, 89, 96-97; economics 83, 95, 131
Edison, Thomas 99
education: art(s) see art(s) education;
music see music education
education, higher 5, 62, 70, 83, 107, 110
education, primary, secondary 156
educational politics see policy
Eisner, Elliot W. 44, 156
Elkins, James 112
emancipation 55, 232
embeddedness 46, 144, 148-49, 152, 165
embodiment 17, 21, 144, 149, 151-52,
164, 188, 224, 234
emotions, emotive 21, 45, 47, 172
empirical: cycle see cycle; deduction see
deduction; description see
description
empiricism, empiricist 23, 188
enactment 144, 149, 152, 165, 188, 217,
234
enclosure 144, 149, 234
end of art 130, 135-38
engagement 2, 93, 95, 100, 101, 148, 15354, 155, 166, 227, 229
engineering 9, 77, 90, 95, 123, 157;
genetic, tissue 158
enhanced publication see publication
environmental studies 51, 90
episteme 47
epistemic character 48, 151, 153-54
epistemic thing 10, 173, 181-82, 184. 18998, 204, 206, 232, 234; object 181,
194, 194n12
epistemology 7, 8, 31, 34, 44, 47-49, 61,
68, 69, 95, 108, 122, 134, 136, 145,

267

Index

148, 152, 162-63, 168-73, 176, 177,
180-81, 187-98, 203, 205-07, 208,
210, 223, 225, 232
equivalence 54, 71
ethics 19, 134, 149, 228
ethnography 44, 51, 123, 155, 157, 165,
223
ethnomethodology 150
everyday life see daily life
evocation 42, 48, 72, 172, 210, 234
exact science see science
experience 17, 21, 38, 46, 48, 85, 94, 100,
147-48, 152, 153, 163, 164, 171-72,
196, 206, 207, 209-10, 234
experiment 51, 157; artistic 157, 191-93;
scientific 191-92 see also
experimental system
experimental development 68, 86-87,
96, 110, 118
experimental practice 150, 155, 165-66,
188, 192-93; system 189-98
experimentation 18, 23, 51-52, 91, 211
explanation 38, 51, 100, 154-55
explanatory grip, gaze 147-48, 163, 169,
181, 194, 206
exposition 221, 223-24, 226, 231, 235,
237-39
expression, expressiveness 21, 24, 45, 71
extended peer review see peer review
fact (artistic, historical, scientific,
social) 46, 176, 182, 195, 198, 204
fact-value dichotomy 23
faculty, department 25-26, 151
faculty of the mind 17, 26, 149
fallibilism 69, 138

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 268

falsifiability, falsification 131, 157
feasibility 89
fellowships 34, 60, 114, 125, 163
Feyerabend, Paul 81, 131
field research, study see research
field(s) of science and technology 9, 31,
68, 73, 77-79, 101-02
film 18; education, studies 35, 101, 150
finding see outcome
Fokke & Sukke 157
food for thought 48, 137, 145n4, 153
forum see academic forum, art forum
Foucault, Michel 5
foundation see ground
foundational debate 21, 107, 157, 187,
203
foundationalism 163
Frascati Manual 68, 76-79, 86-89, 9496, 101, 110
Frayling, Christopher 37, 54, 73, 146
free space 117-18, 183
Friedman, Ken 25n3, 36, 50
fundamental understanding see
understanding
funding 26, 33, 34, 35, 36, 41, 54, 61, 64,
67, 83, 97, 107, 109, 114-15, 125, 164,
167, 204, 217, 222 see also
assessment
funding agency 45, 59, 67, 70, 81, 88,
108, 110, 114-15, 151, 187
fuzziness 181, 192
Gadamer, Hans-Georg 46n16, 49
Gardner, Howard 49
Gehm, Sabine 68n9, 112
Geimer, Peter 4n1

268

The Conflict of the Faculties

gender, gender studies 49, 92, 166
genetic engineering see engineering
Gibbons, Michael 68n9, 84n3, 89-91,
89n4, 95-97, 119, 132, 181, 227n16
Gieryn, Thomas F. 132, 177
globalisation 92, 166, 236
Gosselin, Pierre 111
grant provider see funding agency
Gray, Carole 36, 111
Greenberg, Clement 135
ground 69, 97, 136, 169, 191;
epistemological 69, 157, 232;
aesthetic 70, 84, 92, 232, 197
guidelines see criteria
Gunther, York H. 145n4
Haarberg, Johan 65
Habermas, Jürgen 84, 107, 134n1
Hannula, Mika 36, 111
Haseman, Brad 156
Hegel, Georg W.F. 46, 71, 130, 135-36,
137, 152, 152n8
Heidegger, Martin 5, 129, 152n8, 168,
170, 188
hermeneutics 10, 19, 20, 38, 45, 48-49,
123, 150, 154, 163, 172, 210
heterogeneity 6, 17, 89, 92-93, 178
hierarchy 26, 239; research see research
history, historical research,
historiography 3, 38, 51, 77, 78-79,
83, 95, 149, 149n7, 150, 223; art see
art history; of science see science
and technology studies
history, histories 5, 19, 21, 38, 46, 151,
165; effective (Wirkungsgeschichte)
49

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 269

Hockey, John 53
Hoffmann, Christoph 186, 196-97
Holdridge, Lin 36, 111
homogeneity 89, 93, 116
Hoogenboom, Marijke 39n9
humanities 22, 23, 25, 37-38, 51, 55, 61,
64, 67, 77-79, 87, 90, 94, 95, 99,
108, 123, 144, 146, 150-51, 182, 187,
193, 197, 203; grand theories of 19,
150
Humanus 136
Humboldt University 25
Hunter, Lynette 112
Huseman, Pirkko 112
Husserl, Edmund 168, 188
hybridity 31, 40n11, 81, 159, 191, 193,
204, 224
hypothesis 157, 189, 210; hypothesis-led
research see research
idea, aesthetic 72, 100, 152
identity 92, 132, 166, 236; of art object
see artwork
imitation 69, 71, 154, 168
immediacy 137, 170
immutable mobile 222, 225, 233, 240
impact 51, 93, 118, 143, 155, 161, 166, 183,
227, 233
improvisation 190, 192
inclusive model 55
indeterminacy 192, 193
industry 41n13, 67n7, 88, 114; art 41, 131;
creative see creative industry
information technology see technology
innovation 86, 87, 96, 125, 231, 233
insight 122, 163, 172, 207, 209, 234

269

Index

intelligence, artificial 49, 158, multiple
49
intent 24, 42-43, 80, 161, 207, 208, 209,
222, 232
intentionality 168
interdisciplinarity see research
interpretation 11, 38, 45, 49, 51, 84, 99,
154-55, 164, 166, 197, 211-12
intersubjectivity 85, 122, 232
intimacy 49, 169, 171
intuition 48, 80-81, 162, 164, 166, 190,
192
investment see funding
irrationality see rationality
Jacob, François 181, 189
je ne sais quoi 147, 170, 172
judgment: aesthetic 100; taste 153, of art
100, 153
justification 7, 18, 84, 148, 158, 162; of
beliefs 89, 163, 165-66, 167; political
17; theoretical 59; context of see
context
Kant, Immanuel 24, 48, 72, 100, 134,
151-53, 157, 171
Karlsson, Henrik 7, 112, 188n1, 218n1
Kessels, Jos 47
Kettering, Emil 129n
Keynes, John M. 99
Kiverstein, Julian 152n9
Kjørup, Søren 152, 155n11, 219
Klatser, Robert 41n12
Knorr Cetina, Karin 188, 192, 193, 194
knowledge 31, 47-49; alternative
culture of 5, 9, 12; in art see

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 270

artwork; bodily 48, 169; concept of
1, 12; conventional 22; embodied
17, 47-49, 68, 90, 122, 148, 168-70,
210; embodied in art see artwork;
experiential 147, 163, 203, 210, 234;
explicit 71, 122, 153; focal 122, 163;
formal 80, 143; implicit 47, 68, 71,
122, 191; instrumental 18;
intellectual 47-49, 169; know-how,
knowing how 18, 47, 49, 71, 122,
124, 162 see also craft, skills; knowthat, knowing that 47, 71, 122, 124,
162; not-knowing 71, 124, 162, 164,
173, 181, 190, 193-94, 204, 206;
material 18, 147, 155, 156; nonconceptual see conceptual;
practical 47, 49, 122, 163; prereflective see pre-reflexivity;
propositional 122, 162-63, 196;
rational 153, 210; scholarly 17, 47;
sensory 48-49, 151-52; sensuous 152;
scientific 22, 52n19, 90; tacit 47,
49, 68, 71-72, 122, 163, 171, 191, 193,
194, 210; technical 18, 151, 156;
theoretical 47, 122, 163
knowledge production 68, 76, 80, 9091, 140-73, 173 see also Mode 2
Knowles, J. Gary 156
Korthagen, Fred 47
Kristeller, Paul O. 134-35
Kuhn, Thomas 81, 110
laboratory 18, 23, 51, 95, 108, 157, 165,
178, 190, 192, 223
language 64, 69, 78-79, 109, 122, 136,
152, 167-68, 169, 197, 237

270

The Conflict of the Faculties

Latour, Bruno 6, 11, 17, 131, 133, 182,
188, 192, 193, 196, 210, 215-16, 222,
223, 232, 233, 236, 241
law, legal science 25, 70, 87, 95, 108, 131
learning outcomes 35, 121
legislation 107, 217
legitimacy 45, 53-55, 70, 78, 82-83, 107,
110, 204
Levinas, Emmanuel 5
liberalisation 23, 67, 69-70, 120, 232
life science see science
linguistic turn 136, 152
literature 38, 150
Luhmann, Niklas 192
Luntley, Michael 170n26
Lyotard, Jean-François 48, 136, 152n8
Macleod, Katy 36, 111
Malins, Julian 36, 111
Manhattan Project 99
market, art see art market
Marx, Karl 93
masters 63, 124; degree see degree
material 21, 38, 148, 156, 164 see also
artwork, culture, research,
knowledge
material thinking see thinking
McDowell, John 163, 170
media, new 33, 35
media studies see film
mediality 92, 135
mediation 156, 193
medical science, medicine see science
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice 48-49, 168-69
Mersch, Dieter 112, 191, 192n9
metaphysics 124, 130, 136-38, 145, 168-73

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 271

methodological diversity, pluralism 23,
24, 68, 69, 123, 147, 157, 211
methodology 7, 17, 22-24, 31, 34, 36,
39, 49-52, 61, 69, 80, 95, 101, 108,
123, 146-48, 155, 156-57, 162, 16566, 178, 180-81, 182, 189, 205-07,
218, 226, 236
methods 31, 42-43; 49-52, 80, 91, 14549, 165-66, 203, 208, 211, 236-37 see
also methodology; scientific 88,
159; unconventional 44, 69, 203,
232, 240
mimesis, mimetic 45, 72, 168, 172 see
also imitation
Mittelstraß, Jürgen 112
mobilisation 9, 12, 17, 95, 102, 218
Mode 1 science 89-96, 178
Mode 2 knowledge production 9, 68,
83, 89-96, 119, 132, 178, 179, 203
modernism 21, 32, 71, 134, 136
money 61, 83, 85, 105n, 107
morality 24, 42, 45, 91, 101, 132, 133-38,
149, 153, 179
moving image research see film
multidisciplinarity see research
music education 18, 34, 62-64, 66, 125
musical analysis 19, 150
musicology 19, 38, 101, 121, 150
nanotechnology 79, 83
natural law of art see art
naturalisation 136-38, 152-53
navigation 237-39
Nelson, Robin 22n2
Neske, Günther 129n
network 223-25, 240

271

The Conflict of the Faculties

Nevanlinna, Tuomas 52
Nietzsche, Friedrich 5, 137
Noë, Alva 188
non-cognitive see cognition
non-conceptual(ism) see conceptual
non-discursivity see discursivity
non-propositionality see propositionality
normativity 24, 149n7, 165, 168, 188n1,
193
not-knowing see knowledge
Nowotny, Helga 7, 84n3, 89n4, 181,
188n1, 217, 218n1
object 31, 41, 178, 207-08
objectivity 2, 50, 55, 80, 188
ontology 7, 31, 34, 44, 45-47, 69, 95,
148, 168, 176, 177, 180-81, 189, 194,
205-07, 210, 223, 232
open-access 218, 224, 239
open-name review, open-process
collaboration, open-submission
process see peer review
openness 44, 190, 196, 235
ordinary language philosophy see
philosophy
originality 24, 42-43, 161-62, 208, 209,
233-34
Ott, Michaela 112
outcome, result, finding 24, 31, 38, 110,
145-49, 155, 162, 166, 167-68, 182,
197, 203, 218
painting 134, 195
Pakes, Anna 42, 46n16, 162n16
paradigm 8, 55, 107, 109, 110-16, 154,
156, 160n15, 203

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 272

participant observation 51, 123, 155
participation 52, 151, 155, 165, 211
Parviainen, Jaana 49, 169n24
Pasteur, Louis 96-100
peer review 8, 9, 11, 68, 85, 89, 132-33,
165, 217, 218, 221, 226-41; process
178, 227-28; single-blind 227;
double-blind 133, 167, 227;
extended 90, 94, 132, 178-79, 227,
229; open/open-name 133, 227;
open-process collaboration 133, 227,
239; open-submission process 239;
published review 239; prepublication review 133, 226
perception 71, 85, 92, 145, 152, 168, 172
performance: ethnography see
ethnography; practice (in music)
92, 119; studies 123, 157
performative force, power 11, 17, 20, 72,
93, 100, 148, 167, 172 see also
perspective
performative research see research
performativity 2, 10, 42, 45, 72, 93, 153
perspective (on artistic research) 229, 230
perspective (on theory and practice):
immanent 17, 20-21, 38, 203;
instrumental 17-18, 38, 147, 203;
interpretative 17, 19, 38, 146, 203;
performative 17, 20, 38, 172, 203 see
also performative force, power
Peterson’s Guide 99
PhD see doctorate
phenomenology 21, 48-49, 68, 123, 145,
150, 168-70, 188
philosophy 8, 19, 25, 31, 38, 77; of mind
68, 150, 169n25, 170; ordinary

272

The Conflict of the Faculties

language 137; of science see science
and technology studies; speculative
5, 71
phronesis 47, 163
Plato 133
pluralism, methodological see
methodological pluralism
poetry, poem 134, 167, 195
poiesis 47
Polanyi, Michael 47, 163, 191
policy 8, 31-32 see also science;
education 5, 31, 34, 79, 116-17, 187;
governmental 87
politics, political science 91, 95, 131, 147,
166, 236
Popper, Karl 81, 131
Porter, James I. 134-35
portfolio 43n15, 167
postgraduate institute 33, 58-59, 133
post-historical art see art
postmodernism 32, 48, 71, 82, 136-37,
138, 149
poststructuralism 132, 169n24
power 61, 85, 107 see also performative
force, degree-awarding power
practice-based PhD see doctorate;
practice-based research see research
practice-led PhD see doctorate;
practice-led research see research
practice turn 148, 155, 188, 192-93, 236
pragmatic turn 136, 152
pragmatism 19, 92, 150, 188
praxis 47
pre-publication review see peer review
pre-reflectiveness, pre-reflexivity see
reflexivity

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 273

pre-understanding see understanding
process (research) see research
product see outcome
production of knowledge see knowledge
production
professional doctorate see doctorate
proposition 10-12, 11n2, 12n3, 43, 216,
237, 241
propositionality, non- propositionality
122, 169 see also knowledge
prose 134, 167
protection 5, 20, 25, 43, 50, 60, 70, 144n3
pseudoscience see science
publication, enhanced 221, 238
published review see peer review
pure research see research
Putnam, Hilary 1, 12, 23, 137
quadrant model of research see research
qualitative research see analysis
quality standards see criteria
quantitative research see analysis
randomness 81, 166
rationale: political 7-8; of research 53,
117; theoretical 7-8
rationality 21, 48-49, 148, 153, 188, 192;
irrationality 48
Read, Herbert 37n6
realism 10, 11, 20, 70-73, 124, 130, 137,
168, 171-72, 194-95, 203, 204, 207
realism, constructivist see constructivist
realism
reason 136, 212; artistic reasoning 69,
154n10, 167, 232, 237; space of 11,
163, 167, 170, 234; unity of 134

273

The Conflict of the Faculties

reception 19, 24, 41, 68, 117, 122, 144,
147n6, 207, 208
recognition 8, 16, 66, 68, 107, 126, 132,
204
reconstruction (of research process) 21,
6984, 166, 168, 212
recursive process see research process
reflection 19, 24, 32, 38, 51, 59, 63, 7071, 100, 145, 153, 161, 172; see also
reflexivity
reflection in action 38, 155; on action 38
reflective practitioners 66, 81
reflexivity, reflexiveness 21, 39, 71, 82,
93-94, 100, 101, 117, 137, 233, 235;
pre-reflexivity, pre-reflectiveness 49,
117, 137-38, 143, 145, 148, 169-71,
194, 210; unreflective 149, 168; see
also reflection
reforms, university, higher education see
university reforms
relationship to the world, ourselves,
other people 71, 94, 137, 145, 148,
155, 171-72, 179
relativism 11, 69, 191, 195
reliability 40, 80, 120, 158, 160
religion 25, 78, 131
Renaissance 149
replicability 22, 157
representation 10, 45, 71, 72, 152, 171,
188
research: agenda see agenda;
community 25; definition see
definition; by design see research,
design; and development 33, 68, 77,
85, 109, 144; environment 62, 12425; for the arts 37, 38, 108, 146-47;

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 274

hierarchy 31, 81-84, 85-86; in and
through the arts 24, 31, 64, 70, 101,
108, 144, 147, 157, 182, 187, 206, 211;
in the arts 13, 17, 19, 31, 38-39, 14647; infrastructure 107; into the arts
37, into, for, through design 37;
108; method see method; on the arts
13, 17, 19, 37-38, 64, 94, 146-47;
process 31, 41, 45, 92, 207-08;
question 24, 42-43, 80, 91, 164-65,
208, 210-11, 235-36; through the arts
37; training 50, 63, 108, 124-25, 157,
164; university see university
research, action 12, 87, 96, 123, 151, 155;
applied 18, 26, 54, 68, 83, 86-87, 9699, 109, 110, 118, 123, 156-57;
arts-based 109; basic 25, 26, 31, 55,
68, 83, 86-87, 96-99, 110, 118-19; the
concept, term (artistic) 33, 40, 44,
59, 61n2, 77, 84, 101, 108-10, 143-44,
144n2, 159, 179, 197 see also
terminology; context of see context;
design 54, 55, 108, 151, 157, 157n12;
discovery-led 80, 164; ethnographic
see ethnography; field 51, 155, 165;
foundational 3; fundamental see
research, basic; historical see history;
hypothesis-led 80, 164;
interdisciplinary 51, 68, 79, 89, 92,
119, 235; intradisciplinary 92, 119,
235; material 38, 91; moving image
see film; multidisciplinary 91, 15859, 235; performance-centred 155;
performative 108; postdisciplinary
177; practice as 31, 36, 39, 40, 43, 53,
108, 144, 159, 187, 207, 212, 224,

274

The Conflict of the Faculties

225, 230, 231, 232; practice-based 19,
34, 39, 50, 54, 55, 65-66, 71, 101, 107,
108, 146, 155, 167; practice-led 39,
83, 101, 108; pure see research, basic;
quadrant model of 98-100, 119;
quantitative, qualitative see analysis;
scholarly 6, 31, 44, 50, 54; scientific
31, 87, 90, 156; standard model of
see definition; strategic 87, 96;
studio-based 145, 146; systematic
150; technical 54, 123, 147, 156, 165;
text-centred 155; transdisciplinary 9,
51, 68, 81, 89, 92, 119, 132, 149n7,
164-65, 177, 179-80, 235-36; useinspired basic 98-100
researcher see artist-researcher
result see outcome
revelation 20, 24, 71, 85, 93-94, 172-73,
195
review process see peer review
Rey, Anton 112
Rheinberger, Hans-Jörg 71, 162, 176,
181-82, 186-98, 204, 206, 232, 233,
234
Rietveld, Erik 170n26
Riley, Shannon R. 112
Ritterman, Janet 112
robustness, social see accountability
Romanticism, early 137, 171, 195
Roosevelt, Franklin D. 87
Rouse, Joseph 1, 12, 193
Rubidge, Sarah 80, 164
rule, rules 70, 84, 169, 193 see also
assessment, criteria
Ryle, Gilbert 47

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 275

Säätelä, Simo 170n26
scepticism 4, 20, 53, 69 see also
academia
Schaffer, Simon 188
Schatzki, Theodor 148, 188, 192
Schelling, Friedrich J.W. 48
Schöbi, Stefan 112
scholarship 40, 44, 51-52
Schön, Donald 38, 81
Schuijer, Michiel 18
Schwab, Michael 4n1, 176, 178, 219-20,
220n7, 221, 221n8, 223n10, 224n11
science 5, 9, 40, 44, 100, 133-34; in
action 6, 181, 193, 218; policy 8, 89,
109-10, 203; system 9, 96, 107, 11820
science, agricultural 77, 90; the term,
concept 109, 159; fields of see
field(s) of science and technology;
behavioural 87; biomedical 90 see
also biology; cognitive see cognition;
exact 18, 23, 154; legal see law; life
158, 188, 189 see also biology;
medical 25, 70, 77, 90; natural 23,
25, 51-52, 55, 67, 77, 90, 144, 187,
203; political see politics; pseudo131; social 23, 38, 51, 55, 67, 77, 78,
87, 90, 96, 123, 144, 146-47, 154-56,
166, 187, 203; sport see sport;
subatomic 83; technological 62, 77,
90; theory of see science and
technology studies
science and technology 156-59, 164
science and technology studies 3, 7, 9,
50, 84, 182, 186-88, 217-18, 232;
history of science 7, 44, 61, 89, 196;

275

The Conflict of the Faculties

theory, sociology, philosophy of
science 5, 7, 8, 21, 23, 44, 63, 79, 81,
131, 146, 177, 186-87, 203
scientific method see method
scientific real 195
Scott, Peter 84n3, 89n4, 181
sculpture 134, 195
Sellars, Wilfrid 11, 163
semiotics 19, 123, 150
sensory perception 135
serendipity 80, 165, 190, 192
Shapin, Steven 188
Siegenthaler, Fiona 112
single-blind review see peer review
situatedness 46, 148, 165, 168-69, 188
skills 47, 72, 162-63, 193 see also craft,
artistry, know-how; research 124;
writing 63, 124
social anthropology see anthropology
social engineering 96
social science see science
sociology 62, 154; of art 146, 150; of
science see science and technology
studies
space of reasons see reason
speculative philosophy see philosophy
sport, sport science 95, 131
standard model of research and
development see definition
standards see criteria
Stockhausen, Karlheinz 191
Stokes, Donald E. 87, 96-100, 119
Strand, Dennis 54
structuralism 19, 150
studentship 16, 114, 125
studio 92-93, 146n5, 157

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 276

Sullivan, Graeme 36, 111
Suoranta, Juha 36, 111
supervision 53, 63, 124
system of the arts 134-35
talent 85, 95, 100, 101
taste 45, 153
Taylor, Charles 169n25
techne 47
technical objects 189-90
technological development, progress
87, 89, 96-97; technological science
see science
technology 95, 123-24, 144, 203 see also
science; information 18, 90, 158;
bio- see biotechnology
terminology 7, 33, 37-41, 203
theatre 91, 134
theatre education, school 18, 31, 35;
studies 19, 38, 49, 101, 150, 169n24
theology 25, 70, 131
theoretical distance 19, 20, 37, 38, 147, 150
theory of science see science and
technology studies
thinking: embodied in art see art;
material 71, 123-24, 171, 183;
unfinished 71, 138, 143, 145, 148, 171,
173, 181, 194, 197, 204; the unthought
71, 173, 196
Thomson, Peter 36
training: professional 19, 60, 84, 156;
research see research; in bachelors
and masters 124
transcendence 46, 137-38, 162, 191
transcendentality 70, 100; quasitranscendentality 71

276

The Conflict of the Faculties

transdisciplinarity see research
transformation 11, 196, 217, 218, 221,
223, 232, 236, 238, 240
Tröndle, Martin 113
truth 89, 90, 133, 135
understanding 71, 145, 163 see also
knowledge; fundamental 85, 95, 97100, 110, 119, 160, 203; pre- 169;
tacit 151, 164
unexpected, the 40, 93, 173, 196
unfinished thinking see thinking
unity of reason see reason
university 59, 72, 78, 89, 108, 159;
traditional 22, 31, 144, 151; of
applied sciences 91; research 84;
technical 157
university reforms 31, 34-35, 116
unknown, the 40, 93, 194
unthought, the see thinking
use, considerations of 98-100
Vadén, Tere 36, 111
validity 40, 148, 157
valorisation 51, 87, 132
values: artistic 160, 230; academic 6,
160, 230
Verstehen 122, 154-55, 163
visual anthropology see anthropology
visual art 18, 35, 166
Wälchli, Tan 112
Warmers, Julia 114
Wellmer, Albrecht 123
Wesseling, Janneke 113
Whitley, Richard 89, 90, 95

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 277

Wilcke, Katharina von 112
Wilson, Stephen 158n13
wisdom, practical, worldly see phronesis
Wittgenstein, Ludwig 130, 142, 167,
169n24, 171, 188
Wolff, Georg 129n
Woolgar, Steven 188
world: constitution see constitution;
disclosure, revelation see revelation
Zijlmans, Kitty 3, 158
Zwijnenberg, Robert 3, 158

277

The Conflict of the Faculties

LUP The Conflict Boek_Layout 2 30-03-12 17:11 Pagina 278

