An Ashgate Book

ZZZURXWOHGJHFRP

Donald Alan Schön (September 19, 1930 – September
13, 1997) was a philosopher and professor in urban
planning at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
who developed the concept of reflective practice and
contributed to the theory of organizational learning.

The Reflective
Practitioner
HOW PROFESSIONALS
T H IN K IN ACTION

Donald A. Schön

Hardback edition published in 1983
First published 1991 by Ashgate Publishing
Published 2016 by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon 0X14 4RN
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017, USA
Routledge is an imprint o f the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© Copyright Basic Books, Inc. 1983, 1991

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or
utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now
known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in
any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing
from the publishers.
Notice:
Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks,
and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to in­
fringe.

A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library

ISBN 13: 978-1-85742-319-8 (pbk)

Contents

vii

PREFACE

Part I
P R O F E S S IO N A L K N O W L E D G E A N D
R E F L E C T I O N - I N -A C T I O N
1

T he Crisis of Confidence in Professional
Knowledge

2

3

From Technical Rationality to Reflection-inAction

21

Part II
P R O F E S S IO N A L C O N T E X T S F O R
R E F L E C T IO N - IN -A C T IO N
3

Design as a Reflective Conversation with the
Situation

76
V

CONTENTS
4

Psychotherapy: T h e Patient as a Universe of One

105

5

T he Structure of Reflection-in-Action

128

6

Reflective Practice in the Science-Based
Professions

168

7

Town Planning: Limits to Reflection-in-Action

204

8

The Art of Managing: Reflection-in-Action
W ithin an Organizational Learning System

9

236

Patterns and Limits of Reflection-in-Action
Across the Professions

267

Part III
C O N C L U S IO N
10

Implications for the Professions and Their Place
in Society

287

notes

355

INDEX

365

vi

Preface

This exploration of professional knowledge stems directly from
my working life as an industrial consultant, technology manag­
er, urban planner, policy analyst, and teacher in a professional
school. Because of these experiences, the question of the rela­
tionship between the kinds of knowledge honored in academia
and the kinds of competence valued in professional practice
has emerged for me not only as an intellectual puzzle but as
the object of a personal quest. I have become convinced that
universities are not devoted to the production and distribution
of fundamental knowledge in general. They are institutions
committed, for the most part, to a particular epistemology, a
view of knowledge that fosters selective inattention to practical
competence and professional artistry.
This is not, of course, an unfamiliar point of view. Many
people use the term “ academic” in its pejorative sense. On the
other hand, complaints about the elitism or obscurantism of
the universities tend to be associated with a mystique of practi­
cal competence. W hen people use terms such as “ art” and “ in­
tuition,” they usually intend to terminate discussion rather

vii

PREFACE

than to open up inquiry. It is as though the practitioner says
to his academic colleague, “ W hile I do not accept your view
of knowledge, I cannot describe my own.” Sometimes, indeed,
the practitioner appears to say, “ M y kind of knowledge is inde­
scribable,” or even, “ I will not attempt to describe it lest I para­
lyze myself.” These attitudes have contributed to a widening
rift between the universities and the professions, research and
practice, thought and action. They feed into the university’s
familiar dichotomy between the “ hard” knowledge of science
and scholarship and the “ soft” knowledge of artistry and unvar­
nished opinion. There is nothing here to guide practitioners
who wish to gain a better understanding of the practical uses
and limits of research-based knowledge, or to help scholars who
wish to take a new view of professional action.
W e are in need of inquiry into the epistemology of practice.
W hat is the kind of knowing in which competent practitioners
engage? How is professional knowing like and unlike the kinds
of knowledge presented in academic textbooks, scientific pa­
pers, and learned journals? In what sense, if any, is there intel­
lectual rigor in professional practice?
In this book I offer an approach to epistemology of practice
based on a close examination of what some practitioners—
architects, psychotherapists, engineers, planners, and manag­
ers— actually do. I have collected a sample of vignettes of prac­
tice, concentrating on episodes in which a senior practitioner
tries to help a junior one learn to do something. In my analysis
of these cases, I begin with the assumption that competent
practitioners usually know more than they can say. They ex­
hibit a kind of knowing-in-practice, most of which is tacit. Nev­
ertheless, starting with protocols of actual performance, it is
possible to construct and test models of knowing. Indeed, prac­
titioners themselves often reveal a capacity for reflection on
their intuitive knowing in the midst of action and sometimes
v it i

PREFACE

use this capacity to cope with the unique, uncertain, and con­
flicted situations of practice.
The heart of this study is an analysis of the distinctive struc­
ture of reflection-in-action. I shall argue that it is susceptible
to a kind of rigor that is both like and unlike the rigor of schol­
arly research and controlled experiment. I shall also consider
the question of its limits, some of which derive from myths
about the relation of thought to action, while others are
grounded in powerful features of the interpersonal and institu­
tional contexts that we create for ourselves.
Finally, I shall suggest implications of the idea of reflective
practice— implications for the professional’s relation to his cli­
ents, for the organizational settings of practice, for the future
interaction of research and practice, and for the place of the
professions in the larger society. (The question of education
for reflective practice, which I plan to treat more fully in a later
book, I shall touch on very lightly here.)
The contributions I have found most helpful in this en­
deavor are those of people for whom research functions not
as a distraction from practice but as a development of it. The
late Raymond Hainer, for many years my closest friend and
colleague, first made it possible for me to see the terrain I am
now exploring. Chris Argyris, with whom I have worked closely
for the last decade, has been a model of commitment to reflec­
tive practice. Jeanne Bamberger has introduced me to the joys
and pains of close attention to the intuitive thinking revealed
in the very particular phenomena of actual performance. And
Martin Rein, with whom I taught several seminars on profes­
sional education, has shaped my ideas by giving me the benefit
of criticisms derived from an inside view of my enterprise.
I am grateful to Yehudah Elkana, director of the Van Leer
Institute in Jerusalem, who provided a hospitable environment

ix

PREFACE

for my writing in the spring of 1979. And I am especially in­
debted to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Divi­
sion for Study and Research in Education where I have found
a climate more conducive to this work than any I believe I
could have found elsewhere.
Donald A. Schön
Cambridge, Massachusetts
1982

x

Parti
PROFESSIONAL
KNOW LEDGE AND
R E FLE C TIO N IN-ACTION

1
The Crisis
of Confidence in
Professional Knowledge

The professions have become essential to the very functioning
of our society. W e conduct society’s principal business through
professionals specially trained to carry out that business,
whether it be making war and defending the nation, educating
our children, diagnosing and curing disease, judging and pun­
ishing those who violate the law, settling disputes, managing
industry and business, designing and constructing buildings,
helping those who for one reason or another are unable to fend
for themselves. Our principal formal institutions— schools,
hospitals, government agencies, courts of law, armies— are are­
nas for the exercise of professional activity. W e look to profes­

3

PROFESSIONAL KNOWLEDGE AND REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

sionals for the definition and solution of our problems, and it
is through them that we strive for social progress. In all of these
functions we honor what Everett Hughes has called “ the pro­
fessions’ claim to extraordinary knowledge in matters of great
social importance” ;1 and in return, we grant professionals ex­
traordinary rights and privileges. Hence, professional careers
are among the most coveted and remunerative, and there are
few occupations that have failed to seek out professional status.
As one author asked, are we seeing the professionalization of
nearly everyone?2
But although we are wholly dependent on them, there are
increasing signs of a crisis of confidence in the professions.
Not only have we witnessed well-publicized scandals in which
highly esteemed professionals have misused their autonomy—
where doctors and lawyers, for example, have used their posi­
tions illegitimately for private gain— but we are also encoun­
tering visible failures of professional action. Professionally de­
signed solutions to public problems have had unanticipated
consequences, sometimes worse than the problems they were
designed to solve. Newly invented technologies, professionally
conceived and evaluated, have turned out to produce unin­
tended side effects unacceptable to large segments of our so­
ciety. A professionally conceived and managed war has been
widely perceived as a national disaster. Professionals them­
selves have delivered widely disparate and conflicting recom­
mendations concerning problems of national importance,
including those to which professional activities have contribut­
ed.
As a result, there has been a disposition to blame the profes­
sions for their failures and a loss of faith in professional judg­
ment. There have been strident public calls for external regu­
lation of professional activity, efforts to create public

4

The Crisis of Confidence in Professional Knowledge
organizations to protest and protect against professionally rec­
ommended policies, and appeals to the courts for recourse
against professional incompetence. Even in the most hallowed
professional schools of medicine and law, rebellious students
have written popular exposés of the amoral, irrelevant, or coer­
cive aspects of professional education.3
But the questioning of professionals’ rights and freedoms—
their license to determine who shall be allowed to practice,
their mandate for social control, their autonomy— has been
rooted in a deeper questioning of the professionals’ claim to
extraordinary knowledge in matters of human importance.
This skepticism has taken several forms. In addition to the
public loss of confidence noted above, there has been a viru­
lent ideological attack on the professions, mostly from the
Left. Some critics, like Ivan Illich, have engaged in a whole­
sale debunking of professional claims to special expertise.4
Others have tried to show that professionals misappropriate
specialized knowledge in their own interests and the interest
of a power elite intent on preserving its dominance over the
rest of the society.5 Finally, and most significantly, profes­
sionals themselves have shown signs recently of a loss of con­
fidence in their claims to extraordinary knowledge.
As short a time ago as 1963, Daedalus, the highly regarded
journal of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, pub­
lished a volume on the professions that began, “ Everywhere
in American life, the professions are triumphant.” T he editors
of Daedalus found evidence of triumph in the new visibility
of the professions, the growing demand for their services, and
their expansion in nearly all fields of practice:
W e already devote an impressive percentage of the gross na­
tional product to the training of professionals . . . and the day

5

PROFESSIONAL KNOWLEDGE AND REFLECTION-IN-ACTION
is coining when the “ knowledge industry” will occupy the same
key role in the American economy that the railroad industry did
a hundred years ago . . . A t the midpoint of the fifteen year pe­
riod (1955-1970) in which we are attempting to double the
number of college professors— an awesome task which is made
even more difficult by the simultaneous and equally grandiose ex­
pansion plans of all the other traditional professions, the spectac­
ular proliferation of new professions and the increasing profes­
sionalization of business life— America has become more
cognizant of the professions, and more dependent on their ser­
vices, than at any previous time in our history. Thorsten Veblen's sixty-year-old dream of a professionally run society has never
been closer to realization.6

The editors of Daedalus were by no means alone in their assess­
ment of the situation. It was generally believed both that social
needs for technical expertise were growing and that, as a cause
and consequence of this growth, a professional knowledge in­
dustry had come into being. Richard Hofstadter wrote of the
once self-sufficient "common man,”
he cannot even make his breakfast without using devices, more
or less mysterious to him, which expertise has put at his disposal;
and when he sits down to breakfast and looks at his morning news­
paper he reads about a whole range of vital and intricate issues
and acknowledges, if he is candid with himself, that he has not
acquired competence to judge most of them.7

In his commencement address at Yale in 1962, John Kennedy
had urged his young audience to “ participate. . . in the solution
of the problems that pour upon us, requiring the most sophisti­
cated solutions to complex and obstinate issues.” 8
There were many references to a “ second scientific revolu­
tion” which was producing a “ knowledgeable society,” 9 an “ ac­
6

The Crisis of Confidence in Professional Knowledge
tive society,” a “ post-industrial society,” 10 organized around
professional competence.
T h e prodigious and increasing resources poured into research,
the large and increasing numbers of trained people working on
various natural and social “ problems,” and the expanding pro­
ductivity resulting from this work is, at least in size, a new factor
in social and . . . in political life. This “ second scientific revolu­
tion” . . . reflects both a new appreciation of the role of scientific
knowledge and a new merger of western organization and scien­
tific skills.11

Professionals in the labor force had risen from 4 percent in
1900, to 8 percent in 1950, to 13 percent in 1966.12 Daniel
Bell predicted that professional and technical workers would
reach 15 percent of the labor force by 1975 and might well
rise to 25 percent by the year 2000.13 “ The specialist in his
field must be supreme,” as one commentator noted, “ for who,
other than another similarly qualified specialist, can challenge
him?” 14 Even the critics of the professions conceded that it
had become impossible to conceive of a modern nation without
professions.15
In the meantime, as the professions geared up to meet the
escalating demand for their services, they suffered from over­
load. In the Daedalus volume, the essay on medicine spoke
of the overtaxed physician and of the task of coordinating the
proliferating specialties which had arisen out of successful
medical research and practice. The essay on science com­
plained of the dangers to scientific professionalism inherent
in the bureaucracies which had grown up around scientific re­
search. The distinguished representative of the law stressed
the difficulties in maintaining the independence of the bar,
the “ real problem . . . of making legal services available on

7

PROFESSIONAL KNOWLEDGE AND REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

a wider basis/'16 and the problem of managing the “ burgeon­
ing mass of data to be assimilated."17 The teacher, the mili­
tary professional, even the politician, expressed similar senti­
ments. As Kenneth Lynn observed,
It is notable how many of the contributors to this symposium em­
phasize the multiplicity of demands that are made on the contem­
porary clergyman, teacher, doctor and scientists.18

In nearly all articles, the note most sharply sounded was the
problem of a success attributed, in Bernard Barber's words, to
the fact that:
the generalized knowledge and the community orientation charac­
teristic of professional behavior are indispensable in our society
as we now know it and as we want it to be. Indeed, our kind of
society can now maintain its fundamental character only by enlarg­
ing the scope for professional behavior.19

The success of the professionals was thought to be due, in
short, to the explosion of the “ knowledge industry" whose out­
put it was the function of the professional to apply with rigor,
probity, and “ community orientation" to the goals and prob­
lems of American life.
The only jarring voices in this hymn of confident approba­
tion came from the representatives of divinity and city plan­
ning. James Gustafson spoke of “ the clergyman's dilemma."
The clergy, he observed,
retains a loyalty to ancient traditions in thought, in institutional
life and practice. Y et it cannot simply rest its case for contempo­
rary validity in its faithfulness to the ancient and honorable paths
of the fathers. The overused phrase “ the problem of relevance”
points to the reality of its dilemma . . . 20

8

The Crisis of Confidence in Professional Knowledge
And William Alonso spoke of his profession’s “ lagging under­
standing” :
In the past half-century our cities have outgrown our concepts and
our tools, and I have tried to show how the lagging understanding
of the changes in kind that go with changes in size has led us
to try remedies which are unsuited to the ills of our urban
areas . . . 21

Y et in the period between 1963 and 1981, the expression of
lagging understandings, unsuitable remedies, and professional
dilemmas has become the norm, and the note of triumphant
confidence in the knowledge industry is hardly to be heard at
all. For in these years, both professional and layman have suf­
fered through public events which have undermined belief in
the competence of expertise and brought the legitimacy of the
professions into serious question.
The nation had been enmeshed in a disastrous war which
had caused it to seem at war with itself. T he professional repre­
sentatives of science, technology, and public policy had done
very little to prevent or stop that war or to heal the rifts it pro­
duced. On the contrary, professionals seemed to have a vested
interest in prolonging the conflict.
A series of announced national crises— the deteriorating cit­
ies, poverty, the pollution of the environment, the shortage of
energy— seemed to have roots in the very practices of science,
technology, and public policy that were being called upon to
alleviate them.
Government-sponsored “ wars” against such crises seemed
not to produce the expected results; indeed, they often seemed
to exacerbate the crises. The success of the space program
seemed not to be replicable when the problems to be solved
were the tangled socio-techno-politico-economic predicaments

9

PROFESSIONAL KNOWLEDGE AND REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

of public life. The concept of the “ technological fix” came into
bad odor. Indeed, some of the solutions advocated by profes­
sional experts were seen as having created problems as bad as
or worse than those they had been designed to solve. Just as
urban renewal had emerged in the early sixties as a destroyer
of neighborhoods, its unexpected consequences attributed by
critics like William Alonso to the weakness of its underlying
theory, so in fields as diverse as housing, criminal justice, social
services, welfare, and transportation, the most promising solu­
tions, painstakingly worked out and advocated by the experts,
came to be seen as problematic.22 They were ineffective, they
created new problems, they were derived from theories which
had been shown to be fragile and incomplete. T o some critics,
the public predicaments of the society began to seem less like
problems to be solved through expertise than like dilemmas
whose resolutions could come about only through moral and
political choice.23
Advocates for peace and for the civil rights of minorities
joined forces and turned against the experts whom they saw
as instruments of an all-powerful establishment. Around such
issues as environmental pollution, consumer exploitation, the
inequity and high cost of medical care, the perpetuation of so­
cial injustice, scientists and scientifically trained professionals
found themselves in the unfamiliar role of villain.
Shortages became gluts. The 1970 census revealed that we
had grossly overestimated the demand for teachers, at all levels
of our education system. The shortage of scientists and engi­
neers, so visible in the late 1950s, had evaporated by the mid1960s. Even the much-discussed shortage of physicians began
to seem, by the early 1970s, to be less a shortage than an unwill­
ingness on the part of physicians to serve where they were most
needed.
W ith the scandals of Medicare and Medicaid, with W ater­

10

The Crisis of Confidence in Professional Knowledge
gate and its aftermath, the public image of the professions was
further tarnished. Apparently professionals could not be
counted on to police themselves, to live up to standards of pro­
bity which set them above the ethical level of the general pub­
lic. Like everyone else, they seemed ready to put their special
status to private use.
Cumulatively, these events not only undermined particular
social programs, creating doubts about their underlying strate­
gies of intervention and models of the world, but generated
a pervasive sense of the complexity of the phenomena with
which scientists and professionals in general were attempting
to deal. The events of the mid-1960s and early 1970s eroded
the confidence of the public, and of the professionals them­
selves, that there existed an armamentarium of theories and
techniques sufficient to remove the troubles that beset society.
Indeed, these troubles seemed, at least in part, attributable to
the overweening pride of professional expertise.
In 1982, there is no profession which would celebrate itself
in the triumphant tones of the 1963 Daedalus volume. In spite
of the continuing eagerness of the young to embark on appar­
ently secure and remunerative professional careers, the profes­
sions are in the midst of a crisis of confidence and legitimacy.
In public outcry, in social criticism, and in the complaints of
the professionals themselves, the long-standing professional
claim to a monopoly of knowledge and social control is chal­
lenged— first, because professionals do not live up to the values
and norms which they espouse, and second, because they are
ineffective.
Professionals claim to contribute to social well-being, put
their clients’ needs ahead of their own, and hold themselves
accountable to standards of competence and morality. But
both popular and scholarly critics accuse the professions of
serving themselves at the expense of their clients, ignoring
11

PROFESSIONAL KNOWLEDGE AND REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

their obligations to public service, and failing to police them­
selves effectively.24 As one observer put it, “ the more power­
ful the professions, the more serious the dangers of laxness in
concern for public service and zealousness in promoting the
practitioners’ interests.” 25 Surveys of client populations re­
veal a widespread belief that professionals overcharge for
their services, discriminate against the poor and powerless in
favor of the rich and powerful, and refuse to make themselves
accountable to the public.26 Among younger professionals
and students, there are many who find the professions with­
out real interest in the values they are supposed to promote:
lawyers have no real interest in justice or compassion; physi­
cians, in the equitable distribution of quality health care; sci­
entists and engineers, in the beneficence and safety of their
technologies.27
Evidence of professional ineffectiveness has been presented
in scholarly and journalistic exposés of professionally managed
disasters— the Vietnam W ar, the Bay of Pigs, the nuclear acci­
dent at Three Mile Island, the near-bankruptcy of New York
City, to name only a few examples of this genre.28 Critics have
called attention to the technical expert’s disposition to deploy
his techniques, whatever the consequences. Charles Reich, for
example, describes the Bureau of Reclamation as “ a dam build­
ing machine which will keep building dams as long as there
is running water in a stream in the United States . . . [without
reference to] the values that dams destroy.” He concludes that
professionals. . . can be counted on to do their job but not neces­
sarily to define their job.29

And professionals have been loudly critical of their own failure
to solve social problems, to keep from creating new problems,
and to meet reasonable standards of competence in their sér­
ia

The Crisis of Confidence in Professional Knowledge
vice to their clients. In this vein, Warren Burger recently
lashed out at the inadequate preparation and performance of
trial lawyers in America, and David Rutstein was only among
the first of many physicians to reflect publicly on the failure
of the health-care system to keep pace with the enormous ex­
pansion of the nation’s investment in medical research and
technology.30
Some observers have also noted a trend toward deprofession­
alization. Among such diverse professional groups as engineers,
teachers, musicians, scientists, physicians, and statisticians,
there has been a slackening of the labor market and a decline
in economic status and working conditions, a pattern of institu­
tional change which has been variously labelled “ bureaucratiza­
tion,” “ industrialization,” or even “ proletarianization” of the
professions.31 Professionals are unionizing in increasing num­
bers, apparently in recognition of their status as workers in a
bureaucracy rather than as autonomous managers of their own
careers.
T he crisis of confidence in the professions, and perhaps also
the decline in professional self-image, seems to be rooted in
a growing skepticism about professional effectiveness in the
larger sense, a skeptical reassessment of the professions’ actual
contribution to society’s well-being through the delivery of
competent services based on special knowledge. Clearly, this
skepticism is bound up with the questions of professional selfinterest, bureaucratization, and subordination to the interests
of business or government. But it also hinges centrally on the
question of professional knowledge. Is professional knowledge
adequate to fulfill the espoused purposes of the professions?
Is it sufficient to meet the societal demands which the profes­
sions have helped to create?
The crisis of confidence in the professions may not depend
solely on the question of professional knowledge. On the other

A3

PROFESSIONAL KNOWLEDGE AND REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

hand, even the muckrakers and radical critics, who emphasize
professional self-interest and subordination to class-interest,
envisage a purification and restructuring of the professions so
that society may gain a fuller, more justly distributed access
to the benefits of their special knowledge.32 There remains,
even for these critics, the question of the adequacy of profes­
sional knowledge to the needs and problems of society.
Let us consider, then, how the crisis of confidence in the
professions has been interpreted by professionals who have
given serious thought in their own fields to the adequacy of
professional knowledge. On the whole, their assessment is that
professional knowledge is mismatched to the changing charac­
ter of the situations of practice— the complexity, uncertainty,
instability, uniqueness, and value conflicts which are increas­
ingly perceived as central to the world of professional practice.
In such fields as medicine, management, and engineering,
for example, leading professionals speak of a new awareness o f
a complexity which resists the skills and techniques of tradi­
tional expertise. As physicians have turned their attention from
traditional images of medical practice to the predicament of
the larger health care system, they have come to see the larger
system as a “ tangled web” that traditional medical knowledge
and skill cannot untangle. How can physicians influence a mas­
sively complex health care system which they do not under­
stand and of which only a very small fraction is under their
direct control?33 The dean of a major school of management
speaks of the inadequacy of established management theory
and technique to deal with the increasingly critical task of
“ managing complexity.” 34 The dean of a famous school of en­
gineering observes that the nineteenth-century division of
labor has become obsolete. Professionals are called upon to per­
form tasks for which they have not been educated, and “ the

The Crisis of Confidence in Professional Knowledge
niche no longer fits the education, or the education no longer
fits the niche.” 35
Even if professional knowledge were to catch up with the
new demands of professional practice, the improvement in pro­
fessional performance would be transitory. T he situations of
practice are inherently unstable. Harvey Brooks, an eminent
engineer and educator, argues that professions are now con­
fronted with an “ unprecedent requirement for adaptability” :
T h e dilemma of the professional today lies in the fact that both
ends of the gap he is expected to bridge with his profession are
changing so rapidly: the body of knowledge that he must use and
the expectations of the society that he must serve. Both these
changes have their origin in the same common factor—
technological change . . . T he problem cannot be usefully phrased
in terms of too much technology. Rather it is whether we can gen­
erate technological change fast enough to meet the expectations
and demands that technology itself has generated. And the four
professions— medicine, engineering, business management and
education— must bear the brunt of responsibility for generating
and managing this change. This places on the professional a re­
quirement for adaptability that is unprecedented.36

T he role of the physician will be continually reshaped, over the
next decades, by the reorganization and rationalization of med­
ical care; the proliferating roles of enterprise will call for a rede­
finition of the businessman’s role; and architects will have to
function in radically new ways as a consequence of the intro­
duction of new building technologies, new patterns of real es­
tate and land development, and new techniques of information
processing in design. As the tasks change, so will the demands
for usable knowledge, and the patterns of task and knowledge
are inherently unstable.37
The situations of practice are not problems to be solved but

J5

PROFESSIONAL KNOWLEDGE AND REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

problematic situations characterized by uncertainty, disorder,
and indeterminacy.38 Russell Ackoff, one of the founders of
the field of operations research, has recently announced to his
colleagues that “ the future of operations research is past” 39
because
managers are not confronted with problems that are indepen­
dent of each other, but with dynamic situations that consist of
complex systems of changing problems that interact with each
other. I call such situations messes. Problems are abstractions ex­
tracted from messes by analysis; they are to messes as atoms are
to tables and charts . . . Managers do not solve problems: they
manage messes.40

Ackoff argues that operations research has allowed itself to
become identified with techniques, mathematical models,
and algorithms, rather than with “ the ability to formulate
management problems, solve them, and implement and
maintain their solutions in turbulent environments.” 41 Prob­
lems are interconnected, environments are turbulent, and the
future is indeterminate just in so far as managers can shape
it by their actions. W hat is called for, under these conditions,
is not only the analytic techniques which have been tradi­
tional in operations research, but the active, synthetic skill of
“ designing a desirable future and inventing ways of bringing
it about.” 42
The situations of practice are characterized by unique
events. Erik Erikson, the psychiatrist, has described each pa­
tient as “ a universe of one,” 43 and an eminent physician has
claimed that “ 85 percent of the problems a doctor sees in his
office are not in the book.” 44 Engineers encounter unique
problems of design and are called upon to analyze failures of
structures or materials under conditions which make it impossi­
ble to apply standard tests and measurements.45 The unique

16

The Crisis of Confidence in Professional Knowledge
case calls for an art of practice which “ might be taught, if it
were constant and known, but it is not constant.” 46
Practitioners are frequently embroiled in conflicts of values,
goals, purposes, and interests. Teachers are faced with pres­
sures for increased efficiency in the context of contracting bud­
gets, demands that they rigorously “ teach the basics,” exhorta­
tions to encourage creativity, build citizenship, help students
to examine their values. Workers in the fields of social welfare
are also torn between a professional code which advocates at­
tention to persons and bureaucratic pressure for increased effi­
ciency in processing cases. School superintendants, industrial
managers, and public administrators are asked to respond to
the conflicting demands of the many different groups which
hold a stake in their enterprises. Professionals engaged in re­
search and development are not infrequently torn between a
“ professional” concern for technological elegance, consumer
safety, or social well-being, and an institutional demand for
short-term return on investment.
In some professions, awareness of uncertainty, complexity,
instability, uniqueness, and value conflict has led to the emer­
gence of professional pluralism. Competing views of profes­
sional practice— competing images of the professional role, the
central values of the profession, the relevant knowledge and
skills— have come into good currency. Leston Havens has writ­
ten about the “ babble of voices” which confuses practitioners
in the field of psychotherapy.47 Social workers have produced
multiple, shifting images of the nature of their practice, as have
architects and town planners.48 Each view of professional prac­
tice represents a way of functioning in situations of indetermi­
nacy and value conflict, but the multiplicity of conflicting
views poses a predicament for the practitioner who must
choose among multiple approaches to practice or devise his
own way of combining them.

PROFESSIONAL KNOWLEDGE AND REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

In sum, when leading professionals write or speak about their
own crisis of confidence, they tend to focus on the mismatch
of traditional patterns of practice and knowledge to features
of the practice situation— complexity, uncertainty, instability,
uniqueness, and value conflict— of whose importance they are
becoming increasingly aware.
Surely this is a laudable exercise in self-criticism. Neverthe­
less, there is something puzzling about the translation of waver­
ing confidence in professional expertise into these particular
accounts of the troubles of the professions. If it is true, for ex­
ample, that social reality has shifted out from under the nine­
teenth-century division of labor, creating new zones of com­
plexity and uncertainty, it is also true that practitioners in such
fields as management and industrial technology do sometimes
find ways to make sense of complexity and reduce uncertainty
to manageable risk.
If it is true that there is an irreducible element of art in pro­
fessional practice, it is also true that gifted engineers, teachers,
scientists, architects, and managers sometimes display artistry
in their day-to-day practice. If the art is not invariant, known,
and teachable, it appears nonetheless, at least for some individ­
uals, to be learnable.
If it is true that professional practice has at least as much
to do with finding the problem as with solving the problem
found, it is also true that problem setting is a recognized profes­
sional activity. Some physicians reveal skills in finding the prob­
lems of particular patients in ways that go beyond the conven­
tional boundaries of medical diagnosis. Some engineers, policy
analysts, and operations researchers have become skilled at re­
ducing “ messes” to manageable plans. For some administra­
tors, the need to “ find the right problem” has become a con­
scious principle of action.
And if it is true, finally, that there are conflicting views of

18

The Crisis of Confidence in Professional Knowledge
professional practice, it is also true that some practitioners do
manage to make a thoughtful choice, or even a partial synthe­
sis, from the babble of voices in their professions.
W hy, then, should leading professionals and educators find
these phenomena so disturbing? Surely they are not unaware
of the artful ways in which some practitioners deal competently
with the indeterminacies and value conflicts of practice. It
seems, rather, that they are disturbed because they have no sat­
isfactory way of describing or accounting for the artful compe­
tence which practitioners sometimes reveal in what they do.
They find it unsettling to be unable to make sense of these pro­
cesses in terms of the model of professional knowledge which
they have largely taken for granted. Complexity, instability,
and uncertainty are not removed or resolved by applying spe­
cialized knowledge to well-defined tasks. If anything, the effec­
tive use of specialized knowledge depends on a prior restructur­
ing of situations that are complex and uncertain. An artful
practice of the unique case appears anomalous when profes­
sional competence is modelled in terms of application of estab­
lished techniques to recurrent events. Problem setting has no
place in a body of professional knowledge concerned exclu­
sively with problem solving. The task of choosing among com­
peting paradigms of practice is not amenable to professional
expertise.
The events which led from the “ triumphant professions” of
the early 1960s to the skepticism and unease of the 1970s and
early 1980s have been at least as apparent to the professionals
as to the general public. But the sense of confusion and unease
which is discernable among leading professionals has an addi­
tional source. Professionals have been disturbed to find that
they cannot account for processes they have come to see as
central to professional competence. It is difficult for them to
imagine how to describe and teach what might be meant by

*9

PROFESSIONAL KNOWLEDGE AND REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

making sense of uncertainty, performing artistically, setting
problems, and choosing among competing professional para­
digms, when these processes seem mysterious in the light of
the prevailing model of professional knowledge.
W e are bound to an epistemology of practice which leaves
us at a loss to explain, or even to describe, the competences
to which we now give overriding importance.

20

2
From Technical
Rationality to
Reflection-in- Action

The Dominant Epistemology of Practice
According to the model of Technical Rationality— the view
of professional knowledge which has most powerfully shaped
both our thinking about the professions and the institutional
relations of research, education, and practice— professional ac­
tivity consists in instrumental problem solving made rigorous
by the application of scientific theory and technique. Although
all occupations are concerned, on this view, with the instru­
mental adjustment of means to ends, only the professions prac­
21

PROFESSIONAL KNOWLEDGE AND REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

tice rigorously technical problem solving based on specialized
scientific knowledge.
The model of Technical Rationality has exerted as great an
influence on scholarly writing about the professions as on criti­
cal exposés of the role of the professions in the larger society.
In the 1930s, for example, one of the earliest students of the
professions asserted that
it is not difficult to account in general for the emergence of the
new professions. Large-scale organization has favored specializa­
tion. Specialized occupations have arisen around the new scientific
knowledge.1

In a major book on the professions, published in 1970, W ilbert
Moore embraced Alfred North Whitehead's distinction be­
tween a profession and an avocation. An avocation is “ the an­
tithesis to a profession" because it is “ based upon customary
activities and modified by the trial and error of individual prac­
tice."2 In contrast, Moore said, a profession
involves the application of general principles to specific problems,
and it is a feature of modern societies that such general principles
are abundant and growing.3

The same author argues further that professions are highly spe­
cialized occupations, and that
the two primary bases for specialization within a profession are
(1) the substantive field of knowledge that the specialist professes
to command and (2) the technique of production or application
of knowledge over which the specialist claims mastery.4

Finally, a recent critic of professional expertise sees the profes­
sional's claim to uniqueness as a “ . . . preoccupation with a
specialized skill premised on an underlying theory."5

22

From Technical Rationality to Reflection-in-Action
The prototypes of professional expertise in this sense are the
“ learned professions” of medicine and law and, close behind
these, business and engineering. These are, in Nathan Glazer’s
terms, the “ major” or “ near-major” professions.6 They are dis­
tinct from such “ minor” professions as social work, librarianship, education, divinity, and town planning. In the essay from
which these terms are drawn, Glazer argues that the schools
of the minor professions are hopelessly nonrigorous, dependent
on representatives of academic disciplines, such as economics
or political science, who are superior in status to the professions
themselves. But what is of greatest interest from our point of
view, Glazer’s distinction between major and minor professions
rests on a particularly well-articulated version of the model of
Technical Rationality. The major professions are “ disciplined
by an unambiguous end— health, success in litigation, profit—
which settles men’s minds,” 7 and they operate in stable institu­
tional contexts. Hence they are grounded in systematic, funda­
mental knowledge, of which scientific knowledge is the proto­
type,8 or else they have “ a high component of strictly
technological knowledge based on science in the education
which they provide.” 9 In contrast, the minor professions suffer
from shifting, ambiguous ends and from unstable institutional
contexts of practice, and are therefore unable to develop a base
of systematic, scientific professional knowledge. For Glazer,
the development of a scientific knowledge base depends on
fixed, unambiguous ends because professional practice is an in­
strumental activity. If applied science consists in cumulative,
empirical knowledge about the means best suited to chosen
ends, how can a profession ground itself in science when its
ends are confused or unstable?
The systematic knowledge base of a profession is thought
to have four essential properties. It is specialized, firmly bound­
ed, scientific, and standardized. This last point is particularly

¿3

PROFESSIONAL KNOWLEDGE AND REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

important, because it bears on the paradigmatic relationship
which holds, according to Technical Rationality, between a
profession's knowledge base and its practice. In Wilbert
Moore's words,
If every professional problem were in all respects unique, solutions
would be at best accidental, and therefore have nothing to do with
expert knowledge. W hat we are suggesting, on the contrary, is that
there are sufficient uniformities in problems and in devices for solv­
ing them to qualify the solvers as professionals . . . professionals
apply very general principles, standardized knowledge, to concrete
problems . . . 10

This concept of "application" leads to a view of professional
knowledge as a hierarchy in which "general principles" occupy
the highest level and "concrete problem solving" the lowest.
As Edgar Schein has put it,11 there are three components to
professional knowledge:
1.
2.

3.

An underlying discipline or basic science component upon
which the practice rests or from which it is developed.
An applied science or “engineering” component from which
many of the day-to-day diagnostic procedures and problemsolutions are derived.
A skills and attitudinal component that concerns the actual
performance of services to the client, using the underlying
basic and applied knowledge.12

The application of basic science yields applied science. Applied
science yields diagnostic and problem-solving techniques
which are applied in turn to the actual delivery of services. The
order of application is also an order of derivation and depen­
dence. Applied science is said to "rest on" the foundation of
basic science. And the more basic and general the knowledge,
the higher the status of its producer.
W hen the representatives of aspiring professions consider

24

From Technical Rationality to Reflection-in-Action
the problem of rising to full professional status, they often ask
whether their knowledge base has the requisite properties and
whether it is regularly applied to the everyday problems of prac­
tice. Thus, in an article entitled 'T h e Librarian: From Occupa­
tion to Profession,” 13 the author states that
the central gap is of course the failure to develop a general body
of scientific knowledge bearing precisely on this problem, in the
way that the medical profession with its auxiliary scientific fields
has developed an immense body of knowledge with which to cure
human diseases.
The sciences in which he proposes to ground his profession are
"communications theory, the sociology or psychology of mass
communications, or the psychology of learning as it applies to
reading.” 14 Unfortunately, however, he finds that
most day-to-day professional work utilizes rather concrete rule-ofthumb local regulations and rules and major catalog systems
. . . The problems of selection and organization are dealt with on
a highly empiricist basis, concretely, with little reference to general
scientific principles.15
And a social worker, considering the same sort of question, con­
cludes that "social work is already a profession” because it has
a basis in
theory construction via systematic research. To generate valid the­
ory that will provide a solid base for professional techniques re­
quires the application of the scientific method to the servicerelated problems of the profession. Continued employment of the
scientific method is nurtured by and in turn reinforces the element
of rationality . . . 16
It is by progressing along this route that social work seeks to
"rise within the professional hierarchy so that it, too, might

25

PROFESSIONAL KNOWLEDGE AND REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

enjoy maximum prestige, authority, and monopoly which pres­
ently belong to a few top professions/'17
If the model of Technical Rationality appeared only in such
statements of intent, or in programmatic descriptions of profes­
sional knowledge, we might have some doubts about its domi­
nance. But the model is also embedded in the institutional con­
text of professional life. It is implicit in the institutionalized
relations of research and practice, and in the normative curric­
ula of professional education. Even when practitioners, educa­
tors, and researchers question the model of technical rationality,
they are party to institutions that perpetuate it.
As one would expect from the hierarchical model of profes­
sional knowledge, research is institutionally separate from prac­
tice, connected to it by carefully defined relationships of ex­
change. Researchers are supposed to provide the basic and
applied science from which to derive techniques for diagnosing
and solving the problems of practice. Practitioners are sup­
posed to furnish researchers with problems for study and with
tests of the utility of research results. The researcher's role is
distinct from, and usually considered superior to, the role of
the practitioner.
In the evolution of every profession there emerges the researchertheoretician whose role is that of scientific investigation and theo­
retical systematization. In technological professions, a division of
labor thereby evolves between the theory-oriented and the prac­
tice-oriented person. Witness the physician who prefers to attach
himself to a medical research center rather than to enter private
practice . . . 18

In a similar vein, Nathan Glazer speaks of the sociologist, politi­
cal scientist, or economist who, when he is invited to bring his
discipline to the school of a minor profession, manifests a level

26

From Technical Rationality to Reflection-in-Action
of status disturbingly superior to that of the resident practition­
ers. And in schools of engineering, which have been trans­
formed into schools of engineering science, the engineering sci­
entist tends to place his superior status in the service of values
different from those of the engineering profession.19
The hierarchical separation of research and practice is also
reflected in the normative curriculum of the professional
school. Here the order of the curriculum parallels the order in
which the components of professional knowledge are “ ap­
plied.” The rule is: first, the relevant basic and applied science;
then, the skills of application to real-world problems of prac­
tice. Edgar Schein’s study of professional education led him
to describe the dominant curricular pattern as follows:
Most professional school curricula can be analyzed in terms of the
form and timing of these three elements [of professional knowl­
edge]. Usually the professional curriculum starts with a common
science core followed by the applied science elements. Th e attitudinal and skill components are usually labelled “ practicum” or
“ clinical work” and may be provided simultaneously with the ap­
plied science components or they may occur even later in the pro­
fessional education, depending upon the availability of clients or
the ease of simulating the realities that the professional will have
to face.20

Schein’s use of the term “ skill” is of more than passing interest.
From the point of view of the model of Technical Rationality
institutionalized in the professional curriculum, real knowledge
lies in the theories and techniques of basic and applied science.
Hence, these disciplines should come first. “ Skills” in the use
of theory and technique to solve concrete problems should
come later on, when the student has learned the relevant sci­
ence— first, because he cannot learn skills of application until

27

PROFESSIONAL KNOWLEDGE AND REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

he has learned applicable knowledge; and secondly, because
skills are an ambiguous, secondary kind of knowledge. There
is something disturbing about calling them “ knowledge” at all.
Again, medicine is the prototypical example. Ever since the
Flexner Report, which revolutionized medical education in the
early decades of this century, medical schools have devoted the
first two years of study to the basic sciences— chemistry, physi­
ology, pathology— as “ the appropriate foundation for later clin­
ical training.” 21 Even the physical arrangement of the curricu­
lum reflects the basic division among the elements of
professional knowledge:
The separation of the medical school curriculum into two disjunc­
tive stages, the preclinical and the clinical, reflects the division be­
tween theory and practice. The division also appears in the loca­
tion of training and in medical school facilities. The sciences of
biochemistry, physiology, pathology and pharmacology are learned
from classrooms and laboratories, that is, in formal academic set­
tings. More practical training, in clinical arts such as internal medi­
cine, obstetrics and pediatrics, takes place in hospital clinics,
within actual institutions of delivery.22

And teaching roles tend to reflect the same division:
Medical school faculties tend to be divided between the PhD ’s
and M D ’s, between teachers of basic science and those in clinical
programs.23

Even though the law might be thought to have a dubious
basis in science, the introduction of the still-dominant pattern
of legal education— by Christopher Columbus Langdell at
Harvard University in the 1880s and 1890s— followed the nor­
mative curricular model. In his address before the Harvard Law
School in 1886, Langdell argued that “ first, law is a science,
and secondly . . . all available materials of that science are con­

28

From Technical Rationality to Reflection-in-Action
tained in printed books/'24 Langdell claimed that legal educa­
tion is better conducted in a law school than in a lawyer's office
because legal study is based upon broad, scientifically deter­
mined principles which cut across state lines.
For Langdell claimed law was a science . . . this meant that its
principles could be developed from analysis of prior court decisions
and could be used to predict subsequent ones. Just as Charles W il­
liam Eliot was introducing the experimental laboratory into the
study of natural sciences at Harvard, so it was Langdell’s claim,
with the study of previously decided cases.25

Even the famous “ case method" was originally grounded in
the belief that the teaching of scientific principles should pre­
cede the development of skills in their application.
In his recent review of the Harvard School of Business Ad­
ministration, the school which first adapted Langdell's method
to management education, Derek Bok, the current president
of Harvard University, argues against case method. His argu­
ment reveals both his implicit belief in the normative curricu­
lum of professional education and his adherence to the model
of technical rationality.
Bok begins by noting that case teaching has certainly helped
to keep professors “ closely involved with the activities of real
corporations" and has “ forced them to work continuously at
their teaching."26 But he worries that
although the case is an excellent device for teaching students to

apply theory and technique, it does not provide an ideal way of
communicating concepts and analytic methods in the first in­
stance.27

Exclusive concentration on cases leaves students little time to
“ master analytic technique and conceptual material"— a limi­
tation that has become more critical as “ the corporate world

*9

PROFESSIONAL KNOWLEDGE AND REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

grows more complex” — and it prevents faculty from engaging
in “ intensive work to develop better generalizations, theories
and methods that can eventually be used to attack corporate
problems in more effective ways.” 28 W hat is especially inter­
esting in this argument is its misreading of what many business
case teachers would consider the heart of their teaching: care­
fully guided analysis of innumerable cases drawn from realworld business contexts in order to help students develop the
generic problem-solving skills essential to effective manage­
ment. Although some of the strongest advocates of case teach­
ing admit that they cannot define these skills or relate them
to general theory, they believe that the case method stands on
its own unique merits.29 President Bok has made a contrary
assumption. He assumes that the business school faculty ac­
cepts both the mission to develop “ better generalizations, theo­
ries and methods” and the normative idea of a curriculum
which places general principles and methods before the skills
of application. To faculty members who think they are engaged
in a very different sort of educational enterprise, he argues from
an unquestioned belief in a normative curriculum which de­
rives from the model of Technical Rationality.

The Origins of Technical Rationality
It is striking that the dominant model of professional knowl­
edge seems to its proponents to require very little justification.
How comes it that in the second half of the twentieth century
we find in our universities, embedded not only in men's minds
but in the institutions themselves, a dominant view of profes­
sional knowledge as the application of scientific theory and
technique to the instrumental problems of practice?

3°

From Technical Rationality to Reflection-in-Action
The answer to this question lies in the last three hundred
years of the history of Western ideas and institutions. Techni­
cal Rationality is the heritage of Positivism, the powerful philo­
sophical doctrine that grew up in the nineteenth century as
an account of the rise of science and technology and as a social
movement aimed at applying the achievements of science and
technology to the well-being of mankind. Technical Rational­
ity is the Positivist epistemology of practice. It became institu­
tionalized in the modern university, founded in the late nine­
teenth century when Positivism was at its height, and in the
professional schools which secured their place in the university
in the early decades of the twentieth century.
Because excellent accounts of this story exist elsewhere,30
I shall only touch on its main points here.
Since the Reformation, the history of the W est has been
shaped by the rise of science and technology and by the indus­
trial movement which was both cause and consequence of the
increasingly powerful scientific world-view. As the scientific
world-view gained dominance, so did the idea that human
progress would be achieved by harnessing science to create
technology for the achievement of human ends. This Techno­
logical Program,31 which was first vividly expressed in the writ­
ings of Bacon and Hobbes, became a major theme for the phi­
losophers of the Enlightenment in the eighteenth century, and
by the late nineteenth century had been firmly established as
a pillar of conventional wisdom. By this time, too, the profes­
sions had come to be seen as vehicles for the application of
the new sciences to the achievement of human progress. T he
engineers, closely tied to the development of industrial tech­
nology, became a model of technical practice for the other pro­
fessions. Medicine, a learned profession with origins in the me­
dieval universities, was refashioned in the new image of a
science-based technique for the preservation of health. And

31

PROFESSIONAL KNOWLEDGE AND REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

statecraft came to be seen as a kind of social engineering. As
the professions evolved and proliferated, they became, increas­
ingly, the principal agents of the Technological Program.
As the scientific movement, industrialism, and the Techno­
logical Program became dominant in Western society, a philos­
ophy emerged which sought both to give an account of the
triumphs of science and technology and to purge mankind of
the residues of religion, mysticism, and metaphysics which still
prevented scientific thought and technological practice from
wholly ruling over the affairs of men. It was in this spirit that,
in the first half of the nineteenth century, Auguste Comte first
expressed the three principal doctrines of Positivism. First,
there was the conviction that empirical science was not just
a form of knowledge but the only source of positive knowledge
of the world. Second, there was the intention to cleanse men’s
minds of mysticism, superstition, and other forms of pseudo­
knowledge. And finally, there was the program of extending
scientific knowledge and technical control to human society,
to make technology, as Comte said, “ no longer exclusively geo­
metrical, mechanical or chemical, but also and primarily politi­
cal and moral.” 32
By late nineteenth century, Positivism had become a domi­
nant philosophy. And in the early twentieth century, in the
theories of the Vienna Circle, its epistemological program took
on a beguiling clarity. Meaningful propositions were held to
be of two kinds, either the analytic and essentially tautological
propositions of logic and mathematics, or the empirical propo­
sitions which express knowledge of the world. The truth of the
former was to be grounded in the fact that their negation im­
plies a self-contradiction; the truth of the latter, in some rele­
vant empirical observation. The only significant statements
about the world were those based on empirical observation, and
all disagreements about the world could be resolved, in princi-

32

From Technical Rationality to Reflection-in-Action
pie, by reference to observable facts. Propositions which were
neither analytically nor empirically testable were held to have
no meaning at all. They were dismissed as emotive utterance,
poetry, or mere nonsense.
As Positivists became increasingly sophisticated in their ef­
forts to explain and justify the exclusivity of scientific knowl­
edge, they recognized to what extent observational statements
were theory-laden, and found it necessary to ground empirical
knowledge in irreducible elements of sensory experience. They
began to see laws of nature not as facts inherent in nature but
as constructs created to explain observed phenomena, and sci­
ence became for them a hypothetico-deductive system. In
order to account for his observations, the scientist constructed
hypotheses, abstract models of an unseen world which could
be tested only indirectly through deductions susceptible to con­
firmation or disconfirmation by experiment. The heart of scien­
tific inquiry consisted in the use of crucial experiments to
choose among competing theories of explanation.
In the light of such Positivist doctrines as these, practice ap­
peared as a puzzling anomaly. Practical knowledge exists, but
it does not fit neatly into Positivist categories. W e cannot read­
ily treat it as a form of descriptive knowledge of the world, nor
can we reduce it to the analytic schemas of logic and mathe­
matics. Positivism solved the puzzle of practical knowledge in
a way that had been foreshadowed by the Technological Pro­
gram and by Com te’s program for applying science to morality
and politics. Practical knowledge was to be construed as knowl­
edge of the relationship of means to ends. Given agreement
about ends,33 the question, “ How ought I to act?” could be
reduced to a merely instrumental question about the means
best suited to achieve one’s ends. Disagreement about means
could be resolved by reference to facts concerning the possible
means, their relevant consequences, and the methods for com­

33

PROFESSIONAL KNOWLEDGE AND REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

paring them with respect to the chosen ends of action. Ulti­
mately, the instrumental question could be resolved by re­
course to experiment. And as men built up scientific under­
standings of cause and effect, causal relationships could be
mapped onto instrumental ones. It would be possible to select
the means appropriate to one’s ends by applying the relevant
scientific theory. The question, “ How ought I to act?” could
become a scientific one, and the best means could be selected
by the use of science-based technique.
In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, the pro­
fessions of engineering and medicine achieved dramatic suc­
cesses in reliably adjusting means to ends and became models
of instrumental practice. The engineer’s design and analysis
of materials and artifacts, the physician’s diagnosis and treat­
ment of disease, became prototypes of the science-based, tech­
nical practice which was destined to supplant craft and artistry.
For according to the Positivist epistemology of practice, craft
and artistry had no lasting place in rigorous practical knowl­
edge.
Universities came of age in the United States, assumed their
now familiar structure and styles of operation, in the late nine­
teenth and early twentieth centuries when science and technol­
ogy were on the rise and the intellectual hegemony of Positiv­
ism was beginning to be established. Although other traditions
of thought were never wholly extinguished in American univer­
sities— indeed, in some places managed to preserve a kind of
local dominance— nevertheless, in the United States more
than in any other nation except Germany, the very heart of
the university was given over to the scientific enterprise, to the
ethos of the Technological Program, and to Positivism.
Indeed, it was from the Germanic tradition, carried to the
United States after the Civil W ar by young American gradu­
ates of the German universities, that the new concept of the

34

From Technical Rationality to Reflection-in-Action
university as a multidisciplinary research institution took root
in the United States, first in Johns Hopkins University, the
founding of which was “ perhaps the most decisive single event
in the history of learning in the Western hemisphere.” 34 And
it was from the model of Johns Hopkins that other universities
began to mold themselves around the German ideal and to
manifest, as Edward Shils has written,
a drift of opinion [toward] . .. the appreciation of knowledge, par­
ticularly knowledge of a scientific character. There was general
agreement that knowledge could be accepted as knowledge only
if it rested on empirical evidence, rigorously criticized and ratio­
nally analyzed . . . T he knowledge which was appreciated was secu­
lar knowledge which continued the mission of sacred knowledge,
complemented it, led to it, or replaced it; fundamental, systemati­
cally acquired knowledge was thought in some way to be a step
toward redemption. This kind of knowledge held out the prospect
of the transfiguration of life by improving man's control over the
resources of nature and over the powers that weaken his body; it
offered the prospect of better understanding of society which it
was thought would lead to the improvement of society.35

W ith the coming of the new model of the university, the Posi­
tivist epistemology found expression in normative ideas about
the proper division of labor between the university and the pro­
fessions. As Thorsten Veblen argued in The Higher Learning
in America, “ The difference between the modern university
and the lower and professional schools is broad and simple; not
so much a difference of degree as of kind/'36 The universities
have a higher mission to “ fit men for a life of science and schol­
arship; and [they are] accordingly concerned with such disci­
pline only as they will give efficiency in the pursuit of knowl­
edge''; whereas the lower schools are occupied with “ instilling
such knowledge and habits as will make their pupils fit citizens
of the world in whatever position in the fabric of workday life

35

PROFESSIONAL KNOWLEDGE AND REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

they may fall.” 37 The proper relation between the higher and
lower schools is one of separation and exchange. Quite simply,
the professions are to give their practical problems to the uni­
versity, and the university, the unique source of research, is to
give back to the professions the new scientific knowledge
which it will be their business to apply and test. Under no con­
ditions are the technical men of the lower schools to be allowed
into the university, for this would put them in a false position
which unavoidably leads them to court a specious appearance of
scholarship and so to invest their technological discipline with a de­
gree of pedantry and sophistication; whereby it is hoped to give
these schools and their work some scientific and scholarly pres­
tige.38

Veblen’s battle was, of course, quixotic. The evils against
which he railed at the University of Chicago in 1916 were har­
bingers of a general trend. The survival-oriented interests of
the professions reinforced the interest of university boards of
governors in appropriating schools of useful knowledge. The
professions did enter the new universities, in increasing num­
bers, until by 1963 Bernard Barber could write in Daedalus
that “ nearly all the well-established professions are located in
the universities.” 39
But for this, the professionalizing occupations paid a price.
They had to accept the Positivist epistemology of practice
which was now built into the very tissue of the universities.
And they had also to accept the fundamental division of labor
on which Veblen had placed so great an emphasis. It was to
be the business of university-based scientists and scholars to
create the fundamental theory which professionals and techni­
cians would apply to practice. The function of the professional
school would be

36

From Technical Rationality to Reflection-in-Action
the transmission to its students of the generalized and systematic
knowledge that is the basis of professional performance.40

But this division of labor reflected a hierarchy of kinds of
knowledge which was also a ladder of status. Those who create
new theory were thought to be higher in status than those who
apply it, and the schools of “ higher learning” were thought to
be superior to the “ lower.”
Thus were planted the seeds of the Positivist curriculum,
typical of professional schools in American universities, and the
roots of the now-familiar split between research and practice.

Emerging Awareness of the Limits of Technical
Rationality
Although it was in the early decades of the twentieth century
that occupations professionalized and professional schools
sought their places in the universities, it was W orld W ar II
that gave a major new impetus both to the Technological Pro­
gram and to the Positivist epistemology of practice.
In World W ar II, technologists drew upon scientific re­
search as never before. Vannevar Bush created the first largescale national research and development institute, the National
Research and Development Corporation. The new discipline
of operations research grew out of the American and British
efforts to use applied mathematics for bomb tracking and sub­
marine search. And the Manhattan project became the very
symbol of the successful use of science-based technology for
national ends. Its lesson seemed to be this: If a great social ob­
jective could be clearly defined, if a national commitment to

37

PROFESSIONAL KNOWLEDGE AND REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

it could be mustered, if unlimited resources could be poured
into the necessary research and development, then any such
objective could be achieved. The greatest beneficiary of this
lesson was the institution of research and development itself.
But as a side effect, there was also a reinforcement of the idea
of scientific research as a basis for professional practice.
Following World W ar II, the United States government
began an unparalleled increase in the rate of spending for re­
search. As government spending for research increased, re­
search institutions proliferated. Some were associated with the
universities, others stood outside them. All were organized
around the production of new scientific knowledge and were
largely promoted on the basis of the proposition that the pro­
duction of new scientific knowledge could be used to create
wealth, achieve national goals, improve human life, and solve
social problems. Nowhere was the rate of increase in research
spending more dramatic, and nowhere were the results of that
spending more visible, than in the field of medicine. The great
centers of medical research and teaching were expanded, and
new ones were created. The medical research center, with its
medical school and its teaching hospital, became the institu­
tional model to which other professions aspired. Here was a
solid base of fundamental science, an equally solid body of ap­
plied clinical science, and a profession which had geared itself
to implement the ever-changing products of research. Other
professions, hoping to achieve some of medicine’s effectiveness
and prestige, sought to emulate its linkage of research and
teaching institutions, its hierarchy of research and clinical
roles, and its system for connecting basic and applied research
to practice.
The prestige and apparent success of the medical and engi­
neering models exerted a great attraction for the social sci­
ences. In such fields as education, social work, planning, and

38

From Technical Rationality to Reflection-in-Action
policy making, social scientists attempted to do research, to
apply it, and to educate practitioners, all according to their per­
ceptions of the models of medicine and engineering. Indeed,
the very language of social scientists, rich in references to mea­
surement, controlled experiment, applied science, laboratories,
and clinics, was striking in its reverence for these models.
In the mid-1950s, the Soviet launching of Sputnik gave a
further impetus to national investment in science and technol­
ogy. Sputnik shocked America into increased support for sci­
ence, especially basic science, and created a new sense of ur­
gency about the building of a society based on science.
Suddenly we became acutely aware of a national shortage of
professionals— scientists and engineers, but also physicians and
teachers— who were seen as necessary to the development and
application of scientific knowledge. It was the cumulative im­
pact of these national responses to World W ar II and Sputnik
which set the stage for the triumph of professionalism, the tri­
umph celebrated in the Daedalus issue of 1963.
Between 1963 and 1982, however, both the general public
and the professionals have become increasingly aware of the
flaws and limitations of the professions. As I have pointed out
in chapter 1, the professions have suffered a crisis of legitimacy
rooted both in their perceived failure to live up to their own
norms and in their perceived incapacity to help society achieve
its objectives and solve its problems. Increasingly we have
become aware of the importance to actual practice of phe­
nomena— complexity, uncertainty, instability, uniqueness, and
value-conflict— which do not fit the model of Technical
Rationality. Now, in the light of the Positivist origins of T ech­
nical Rationality, we can more readily see why these phenom­
ena are so troublesome.
From the perspective of Technical Rationality, professional
practice is a process of problem solving. Problems of choice

39

PROFESSIONAL KNOWLEDGE AND REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

or decision are solved through the selection, from available
means, of the one best suited to established ends. But with this
emphasis on problem solving, we ignore problem setting, the
process by which we define the decision to be made, the ends
to be achieved, the means which may be chosen. In real-world
practice, problems do not present themselves to the practi­
tioner as givens. They must be constructed from the materials
of problematic situations which are puzzling, troubling, and
uncertain. In order to convert a problematic situation to a
problem, a practitioner must do a certain kind of work. He
must make sense of an uncertain situation that initially makes
no sense. W hen professionals consider what road to build, for
example, they deal usually with a complex and ill-defined situa­
tion in which geographic, topological, financial, economic, and
political issues are all mixed up together. Once they have some­
how decided what road to build and go on to consider how
best to build it, they may have a problem they can solve by
the application of available techniques; but when the road they
have built leads unexpectedly to the destruction of a neighbor­
hood, they may find themselves again in a situation of uncer­
tainty.
It is this sort of situation that professionals are coming in­
creasingly to see as central to their practice. They are coming
to recognize that although problem setting is a necessary con­
dition for technical problem solving, it is not itself a technical
problem. W hen we set the problem, we select what we will
treat as the “ things” of the situation, we set the boundaries
of our attention to it, and we impose upon it a coherence
which allows us to say what is wrong and in what directions
the situation needs to be changed. Problem setting is a pro­
cess in which, interactively, we name the things to which we
will attend and frame the context in which we will attend to
them.

40

From Technical Rationality to Reflection-in-Action
Even when a problem has been constructed, it may escape
the categories of applied science because it presents itself as
unique or unstable. In order to solve a problem by the applica­
tion of existing theory or technique, a practitioner must be able
to map those categories onto features of the practice situation.
W hen a nutritionist finds a diet deficient in lysine, for example,
dietary supplements known to contain lysine can be recom­
mended. A physician who recognizes a case of measles can map
it onto a system of techniques for diagnosis, treatment, and
prognosis. But a unique case falls outside the categories of ap­
plied theory; an unstable situation slips out from under them.
A physician cannot apply standard techniques to a case that
is not in the books. And a nutritionist attempting a planned
nutritional intervention in a rural Central American commu­
nity may discover that the intervention fails because the situa­
tion has become something other than the one planned for.
Technical Rationality depends on agreement about ends.
W hen ends are fixed and clear, then the decision to act can
present itself as an instrumental problem. But when ends are
confused and conflicting, there is as yet no “ problem” to solve.
A conflict of ends cannot be resolved by the use of techniques
derived from applied research. It is rather through the non­
technical process of framing the problematic situation that we
may organize and clarify both the ends to be achieved and the
possible means of achieving them.
Similarly, when there are conflicting paradigms of profes­
sional practice, such as we find in the pluralism of psychiatry,
social work, or town planning, there is no clearly established
context for the use of technique. There is contention over mul­
tiple ways of framing the practice role, each of which entrains
a distinctive approach to problem setting and solving. And
when practitioners do resolve conflicting role frames, it is
through a kind of inquiry which falls outside the model of

41

PROFESSIONAL KNOWLEDGE AND REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

Technical Rationality. Again, it is the work of naming and
framing that creates the conditions necessary to the exercise
of technical expertise.
W e can readily understand, therefore, not only why uncer­
tainty, uniqueness, instability, and value conflict are so trouble­
some to the Positivist epistemology of practice, but also why
practitioners bound by this epistemology find themselves
caught in a dilemma. Their definition of rigorous professional
knowledge excludes phenomena they have learned to see as
central to their practice. And artistic ways of coping with these
phenomena do not qualify, for them, as rigorous professional
knowledge.
This dilemma of “ rigor or relevance” arises more acutely in
some areas of practice than in others. In the varied topography
of professional practice, there is a high, hard ground where
practitioners can make effective use of research-based theory
and technique, and there is a swampy lowland where situations
are confusing “ messes” incapable of technical solution. The
difficulty is that the problems of the high ground, however
great their technical interest, are often relatively unimportant
to clients or to the larger society, while in the swamp are the
problems of greatest human concern. Shall the practitioner
stay on the high, hard ground where he can practice rigorously,
as he understands rigor, but where he is constrained to deal
with problems of relatively little social importance? Or shall
he descend to the swamp where he can engage the most impor­
tant and challenging problems if he is willing to forsake techni­
cal rigor?
In such “ major” professions as medicine, engineering, or
agronomy there are zones where practitioners can function as
technical experts. But there are also zones where the major
professions resemble the minor ones. Medical technologies
such as kidney dialysis generate demands in excess of the na­

42

From Technical Rationality to Reflection-in-Action
tion's willingness to invest in medical care. Engineering that
seems powerful and elegant when judged from a narrowly
technical perspective may also carry unacceptable risks to en­
vironmental quality or human safety. Large-scale, industrial­
ized agriculture destroys the peasant economies of the devel­
oping worlds. How should professionals take account of such
issues as these?
There are those who choose the swampy lowlands. They de­
liberately involve themselves in messy but crucially important
problems and, when asked to describe their methods of inquiry,
they speak of experience, trial and error, intuition, and mud­
dling through.
Other professionals opt for the high ground. Hungry for
technical rigor, devoted to an image of solid professional com­
petence, or fearful of entering a world in which they feel they
do not know what they are doing, they choose to confine them­
selves to a narrowly technical practice.
The field of “ formal modelling” offers an interesting context
in which to observe the two responses.
During World W ar II, operations research grew out of the
successful use of applied mathematics in submarine search and
bomb tracking. After World W ar II, the development of the
digital computer sparked widespread interest in formal, quanti­
tative, computerized models which seemed to offer a new tech­
nique for converting “ soft” problems into “ hard” ones. A new
breed of technical practitioner came into being. Systems ana­
lysts, management scientists, policy analysts, began to use for­
mal modelling techniques on problems of inventory control,
business policy, information retrieval, transportation planning,
urban land use, the delivery of medical care, the criminal jus­
tice system, and the control of the economy. By the late 1960s,
there was scarcely a described problem for which someone had
not constructed a computerized model. But in recent years

43

PROFESSIONAL KNOWLEDGE AND REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

there has been a widening consensus, even among formal mod­
ellers, that the early hopes were greatly inflated. Formal models
have been usefully employed to solve problems in such rela­
tively undemanding areas as inventory control and logistics.
They have generally failed to yield effective results in the more
complex, less clearly defined problems of business manage­
ment, housing policy, or criminal justice.
Formal modellers have responded to this unpleasant discov­
ery in several different ways. Some have continued to ply their
trade in the less demanding areas of the field. Some have aban­
doned their original training in order to address themselves to
real-world problems. Others have decided to treat formal mod­
els as “ probes” or “ metaphors” useful only as sources of new
perspectives on complex situations. But for the most part, the
use of formal models has proceeded as though it had a life of
its own. Driven by the evolving questions of theory and tech­
nique, formal modelling has become increasingly divergent
from the real-world problems of practice. And practitioners
who choose to remain on the high ground have continued to
use formal models for complex problems, quite oblivious to the
troubles incurred whenever a serious attempt is made to imple­
ment them.
Many practitioners have adopted this response to the di­
lemma of rigor or relevance, cutting the practice situation to
fit professional knowledge. This they do in several ways. They
may become selectively inattentive to data that fall outside
their categories. Designers of management information sys­
tems may simply avoid noticing, for example, how their sys­
tems trigger games of control and evasion. They may use “ junk
categories” to explain away discrepant data, as technical ana­
lysts sometimes attribute the failure of their recommendations
to “ personality” or to “ politics.” 41 Or they may try to force
the situation into a mold which lends itself to the use of avail­

44

From Technical Rationality to Reflection-in-Action
able techniques. Thus an industrial engineer may simplify the
actual arrangement of a manufacturing system in order to
make it easier to analyze; or, more ominously, members of the
helping professions may get rid of clients who resist profes­
sional help, relegating them to such categories as “ problem ten­
ant” or “ rebellious child.” All such strategies carry a danger
of misreading situations, or manipulating them, to serve the
practitioner’s interest in maintaining his confidence in his stan­
dard models and techniques. W hen people are involved in the
situation, the practitioner may preserve his sense of expertise
at his clients’ expense.
Some students of the professions have tried to take account
of the limitations of technical expertise and have proposed new
approaches to the predicament of professional knowledge.
Among these are Edgar Schein and Nathan Glazer, whom I
have already mentioned, and Herbert Simon, whose The Sci­
ences of the Artificial has aroused a great deal of interest in
professional circles. Each of these writers has identified a gap
between professional knowledge and the demands of real-world
practice. Their formulations of the gap are intriguingly differ­
ent, yet they reveal an important underlying similarity.
T o Schein, the gap lies in the fact that basic and applied
sciences are “ convergent,” whereas practice is “ divergent.”
He believes that some professions have already achieved, and
that others will eventually achieve, “ a high degree of consen­
sus on the paradigms to be used in the analysis of phenomena
and . . . what constitutes the relevant knowledge base for
practice.” 42 Nevertheless, Schein also believes that the prob­
lems of professional practice continue to have unique and un­
predictable elements. One of the hallmarks of the profession­
al, therefore, is his ability to “ take a convergent knowledge
base and convert it into professional services that are tailored
to the unique requirements of the client system,” a process

45

PROFESSIONAL KNOWLEDGE AND REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

which demands “ divergent thinking skills.” 43 About these,
however, Schein has very little to say, and for good reason. If
divergent skills could be described in terms of theory or tech­
nique, they would belong to one or another of the compo­
nents of the hierarchy of professional knowledge. But if they
are neither theory nor technique, and are still a kind of
knowledge, how are they to be described? They must remain
a mysterious, residual category.
For Glazer, the critical distinction is between kinds of pro­
fessions. T o professions like medicine and law Glazer attributes
fixed and unambiguous ends, stable institutional contexts, and
fixed contents of professional knowledge sufficient for rigorous
practice. To professions such as divinity and social work he at­
tributes ambiguous ends, shifting contexts of practice, and no
fixed content of professional knowledge. O f these professions,
he despairs. Thus the gap which Schein locates between “ con­
vergent” science and “ divergent” practice, Glazer locates be­
tween major and minor professions.
It is Simon, however, who most clearly links the predica­
ment of professional knowledge to the historical origins of the
Positivist epistemology of practice. Simon believes that all pro­
fessional practice is centrally concerned with what he calls “ de­
sign,” that is, with the process of “ changing existing situations
into preferred ones.” 44 But design in this sense is precisely
what the professional schools do not teach. The older schools
have a knowledge of design that is “ intellectually soft, intuitive,
informal and cookbooky,” 45 and the newer ones, more ab­
sorbed into the general culture of the modern university, have
become schools of natural science. Thus,
engineering schools have become schools of physics and mathe­
matics; medical schools have become schools of biological science;
business schools have become schools of finite mathematics.46

46

From Technical Rationality to Reflection-in-Action
Both older and newer schools have "nearly abdicated responsi­
bility for training in the core professional skill/'47 in large part
because such training would have to be grounded in a science
of design which does not yet exist. Simon proposes to build
a science of design by emulating and extending the optimiza­
tion methods which have been developed in statistical decision
theory and management science. An optimization problem is
a well-formed problem of the following kind:
A list of foods is provided, the command variables being quantities
of the various foods that are to be included in the diet. Th e envi­
ronmental parameters are the prices and nutritional contents (cal­
ories, vitamins, minerals, and so on) of each of the foods. T he util­
ity function is the cost (with a minus sign attached) of the diet,
subject to the constraints, say, that it not contain more than 2000
calories per day, that it meet specified minimum needs for vita­
mins and minerals, and that rutabaga not be eaten more than once
a week . . . The problem is to select the quantities of foods that
will meet the nutritional requirements and side conditions at the
given prices for the lowest cost.48

Here, ends have been converted to "constraints" and "utility
functions"; means, to "command variables"; and laws, to "en­
vironmental parameters." Once problems are well formed in
this way, they can be solved by a calculus of decision. As we
have seen, however, well-formed instrumental problems are not
given but must be constructed from messy problematic situa­
tions. Although Simon proposes to fill the gap between natural
science and design practice with a science of design, his science
can be applied only to well-formed problems already extracted
from situations of practice.
Schein, Glazer, and Simon propose three different ap­
proaches to the limitations of Technical Rationality and the
related dilemma of rigor or relevance. All three employ a com­
mon strategy, however. They try to fill the gap between the

47

PROFESSIONAL KNOWLEDGE AND REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

scientific basis of professional knowledge and the demands of
real-world practice in such a way as to preserve the model of
Technical Rationality. Schein does it by segregating conver­
gent science from divergent practice, relegating divergence to
a residual category called “ divergent skill.” Glazer does it by
attributing convergence to the major professions, which he ap­
plauds, and divergence to the minor professions, which he dis­
misses. Simon does it by proposing a science of design which
depends on having well-formed instrumental problems to
begin with.
Yet the Positivist epistemology of practice, the model of pro­
fessional knowledge to which these writers cling, has fallen into
disrepute in its original home, the philosophy of science. As
Richard Bernstein has written,
There is not a single major thesis advanced by either nineteenthcentury Positivists or the Vienna Circle that has not been devastatingly criticized when measured by the Positivists' own standards
for philosophical argument. The original formulations of the analytic-synthetic dichotomy and the verifiability criterion of meaning
have been abandoned. It has been effectively shown that the Posi­
tivists' understanding of the natural sciences and the formal disci­
plines is grossly oversimplified. Whatever one’s final judgment
about the current disputes in the post-empiricist philosophy and
history of science . . . there is rational agreement about the inade­
quacy of the original Positivist understanding of science, knowl­
edge and meaning.49

Among philosophers of science no one wants any longer to be
called a Positivist, and there is a rebirth of interest in the an­
cient topics of craft, artistry, and myth— topics whose fate Pos­
itivism once claimed to have sealed. It seems clear, however,
that the dilemma which afflicts the professions hinges not on
science per se but on the Positivist view of science. From this
perspective, we tend to see science, after the fact, as a body

48

From Technical Rationality to Reflection-in-Action
of established propositions derived from research. W hen we
recognize their limited utility in practice, we experience the
dilemma of rigor or relevance. But we may also consider sci­
ence before the fact as a process in which scientists grapple
with uncertainties and display arts of inquiry akin to the un­
certainties and arts of practice.
Let us then reconsider the question of professional knowl­
edge; let us stand the question on its head. If the model of
Technical Rationality is incomplete, in that it fails to account
for practical competence in “ divergent” situations, so much
the worse for the model. Let us search, instead, for an episte­
mology of practice implicit in the artistic, intuitive processes
which some practitioners do bring to situations of uncertainty,
instability, uniqueness, and value conflict.

Reflection-in-Action
W hen we go about the spontaneous, intuitive performance of
the actions of everyday life, we show ourselves to be knowledge­
able in a special way. Often we cannot say what it is that we
know. W hen we try to describe it we find ourselves at a loss,
or we produce descriptions that are obviously inappropriate.
Our knowing is ordinarily tacit, implicit in our patterns of ac­
tion and in our feel for the stuff with which we are dealing.
It seems right to say that our knowing is in our action.
Similarly, the workaday life of the professional depends on
tacit knowing-in-action. Every competent practitioner can rec­
ognize phenomena— families of symptoms associated with a
particular disease, peculiarities of a certain kind of building
site, irregularities of materials or structures— for which he can­
not give a reasonably accurate or complete description. In his

49

PROFESSIONAL KNOWLEDGE AND REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

day-to-day practice he makes innumerable judgments of quality
for which he cannot state adequate criteria, and he displays
skills for which he cannot state the rules and procedures. Even
when he makes conscious use of research-based theories and
techniques, he is dependent on tacit recognitions, judgments,
and skillful performances.
On the other hand, both ordinary people and professional
practitioners often think about what they are doing, sometimes
even while doing it. Stimulated by surprise, they turn thought
back on action and on the knowing which is implicit in action.
They may ask themselves, for example, “ W hat features do I
notice when I recognize this thing? W hat are the criteria by
which I make this judgment? W hat procedures am I enacting
when I perform this skill? How am I framing the problem that
1am trying to solve?” Usually reflection on knowing-in-action
goes together with reflection on the stuff at hand. There is
some puzzling, or troubling, or interesting phenomenon with
which the individual is trying to deal. As he tries to make sense
of it, he also reflects on the understandings which have been
implicit in his action, understandings which he surfaces, criti­
cizes, restructures, and embodies in further action.
It is this entire process of reflection-in-action which is cen­
tral to the “ art” by which practitioners sometimes deal well
with situations of uncertainty, instability, uniqueness, and
value conflict.
Knowing-in-action. Once we put aside the model of Techni­
cal Rationality, which leads us to think of intelligent practice
as an application of knowledge to instrumental decisions, there
is nothing strange about the idea that a kind of knowing is in­
herent in intelligent action. Common sense admits the cate­
gory of know-how, and it does not stretch common sense very
much to say that the know-how is in the action— that a tight­
rope walker’s know-how, for example, lies in, and is revealed

5°

From Technical Rationality to Reflection-in-Action
by, the way he takes his trip across the wire, or that a big-league
pitcher's know-how is in his way of pitching to a batter's weak­
ness, changing his pace, or distributing his energies over the
course of a game. There is nothing in common sense to make
us say that know-how consists in rules or plans which we enter­
tain in the mind prior to action. Although we sometimes think
before acting, it is also true that in much of the spontaneous
behavior of skillful practice we reveal a kind of knowing which
does not stem from a prior intellectual operation.
As Gilbert Ryle has put it,
W hat distinguishes sensible from silly operations is not their par­
entage but their procedure, and this holds no less for intellectual
than for practical performances. “ Intelligent” cannot be defined
in terms of “ intellectual” or “ knowing how ” in terms of “ knowing
that7) “ thinking what I am doing” does not connote “ both think­
ing what to do and doing it.” W hen I do something intelligently
. . . I am doing one thing and not two. M y performance has a
special procedure or manner, not special antecedents.50

And Andrew Harrison has recently put the same thought in
this pithy phrase: when someone acts intelligently, he “ acts his
mind."51
Over the years, several writers on the epistemology of prac­
tice have been struck by the fact that skillful action often re­
veals a “ knowing more than we can say." They have invented
various names for this sort of knowing, and have drawn their
examples from different domains of practice.
As early as 1938, in an essay called “ Mind in Everyday A f­
fairs," Chester Barnard distinguished “ thinking processes"
from “ non-logical processes" which are not capable of being
expressed in words or as reasoning, and which are only made
known by a judgment, decision, or action.52 Barnard's exam­
ples include judgments of distance in golf or ball-throwing, a

51

PROFESSIONAL KNOWLEDGE AND REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

high-school boy solving quadratic equations, and a practiced
accountant who can take “ a balance sheet of considerable
complexity and within minutes or even seconds get a signifi­
cant set of facts from it.” 53 Such processes may be uncon­
scious or they may occur so rapidly that “ they could not be
analyzed by the persons in whose brain they take place.” 54
O f the high-school mathematician, Barnard says, memorably,
“ He could not write the text books which are registered in
his mind.” 55 Barnard believes that our bias toward thinking
blinds us to the non-logical processes which are omnipresent
in effective practice.
Michael Polanyi, who invented the phrase “ tacit knowing,”
draws examples from the recognition of faces and the use of
tools. If we know a person’s face, we can recognize it among
a thousand, indeed, among a million, though we usually cannot
tell how we recognize a face we know. Similarly, we can recog­
nize the moods of the human face without being able to tell,
“ except quite vaguely,” 56 by what signs we know them. W hen
we learn to use a tool, or a probe or stick for feeling our way,
our initial awareness of its impact on our hand is transformed
“ into a sense of its point touching the objects we are explor­
ing.” 57 In Polanyi’s phrase, we attend “ from” its impact on
our hand “ to” its effect on the things to which we are applying
it. In this process, which is essential to the acquisition of a skill,
the feelings of which we are initially aware become internalized
in our tacit knowing.
Chris Alexander, in his Notes Toward a Synthesis of
Form, 58 considers the knowing involved in design. He be­
lieves that we can often recognize and correct the “ bad fit”
of a form to its context, but that we usually cannot describe
the rules by which we find a fit bad or recognize the cor­
rected form to be good. Traditional artifacts evolve culturally
through successive detections and corrections of bad fit until

52

From Technical Rationality to Reflection-in-Action
the resulting forms are good. Thus for generations the Slova­
kian peasants made beautiful shawls woven of yarns which
had been dipped in homemade dyes. W hen aniline dyes were
made available to them, “ the glory of the shawls was spoil­
ed.” 59 The shawlmakers had no innate ability to make good
shawls but “ were simply able, as many of us are, to recognize
bad shawls and their own mistakes. Over the generations
. . . whenever a bad one was made, it was recognized as such,
and therefore not repeated.” 60 The introduction of aniline
dyes disrupted the cultural process of design, for the shawlmakers could not produce wholly new designs of high quality;
they could only recognize “bad fit” within a familiar pat­
tern.
Ruminating on Alexander’s example, Geoffrey Vickers
points out that it is not only artistic judgments which are based
on a sense of form which cannot be fully articulated:
artists, so far from being alone in this, exhibit most clearly an odd­
ity which is present in all such judgments. W e can recognize and
describe deviations from a norm very much more clearly than we
can describe the norm itself.61

For Vickers, it is through such tacit norms that all of us make
the judgments, the qualitative appreciations of situations, on
which our practical competence depends.
Psycholinguists have noted that we speak in conformity with
rules of phonology and syntax which most of us cannot de­
scribe.62 Alfred Schultz and his intellectual descendants have
analyzed the tacit, everyday know-how that we bring to social
interactions such as the rituals of greeting, ending a meeting,
or standing in a crowded elevator.63 Birdwhistell has made
comparable contributions to a description of the tacit knowl­
edge embodied in our use and recognition of movement and
gesture.64 In these domains, too, we behave according to rules

53

PROFESSIONAL KNOWLEDGE AND REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

and procedures that we cannot usually describe and of which
we are often unaware.
In examples like these, knowing has the following properties:
•

•
•

There are actions, recognitions, and judgments which we know
how to carry out spontaneously; we do not have to think about
them prior to or during their performance.
W e are often unaware of having learned to do these things;
we simply find ourselves doing them.
In some cases, we were once aware of the understandings
which were subsequently internalized in our feeling for the
stuff of action. In other cases, we may never have been aware
of them. In both cases, however, we are usually unable to de­
scribe the knowing which our action reveals.

It is in this sense that I speak of knowing-m-action, the char­
acteristic mode of ordinary practical knowledge.
Reflecting-in-action. If common sense recognizes knowingin-action, it also recognizes that we sometimes think about
what we are doing. Phrases like “ thinking on your feet,” “ keep­
ing your wits about you,” and “ learning by doing” suggest not
only that we can think about doing but that we can think about
doing something while doing it. Some of the most interesting
examples of this process occur in the midst of a performance.
Big-league baseball pitchers speak, for example, of the expe­
rience of “ finding the groove” :
Only a few pitchers can control the whole game with pure physical
ability. The rest have to learn to adjust once they're out there. If
they can't, they're dead ducks.
[You get] a special feel for the ball, a kind of command that lets
you repeat the exact same thing you did before that proved suc­
cessful.
Finding your groove has to do with studying those winning habits
and trying to repeat them every time you perform.65

54

From Technical Rationality to Reflection-in-Action
I do not wholly understand what it means to “ find the groove.’'
It is clear, however, that the pitchers are talking about a partic­
ular kind of reflection. W hat is “ learning to adjust once you’re
out there” ? Presumably it involves noticing how you have been
pitching to the batters and how well it has been working, and
on the basis of these thoughts and observations, changing the
way you have been doing it. W hen you get a “ feel for the ball”
that lets you “ repeat the exact same thing you did before that
proved successful,” you are noticing, at the very least, that you
have been doing something right, and your “ feeling” allows
you to do that something again. W hen you “ study those win­
ning habits,” you are thinking about the know-how that has
enabled you to win. The pitchers seem to be talking about a
kind of reflection on their patterns of action, on the situations
in which they are performing, and on the know-how implicit
in their performance. They are reflecting on action and, in
some cases, reflecting in action.
W hen good jazz musicians improvise together, they also
manifest a “ feel for” their material and they make on-the-spot
adjustments to the sounds they hear. Listening to one another
and to themselves, they feel where the music is going and ad­
just their playing accordingly. They can do this, first of all, be­
cause their collective effort at musical invention makes use of
a schema— a metric, melodic, and harmonic schema familiar
to all the participants— which gives a predictable order to the
piece. In addition, each of the musicians has at the ready a
repertoire of musical figures which he can deliver at appropri­
ate moments. Improvisation consists in varying, combining,
and recombining a set of figures within the schema which
bounds and gives coherence to the performance. As the musi­
cians feel the direction of the music that is developing out of
their interwoven contributions, they make new sense of it and
adjust their performance to the new sense they have made.

55

PROFESSIONAL KNOWLEDGE AND REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

They are reflecting-in-action on the music they are collectively
making and on their individual contributions to it, thinking
what they are doing and, in the process, evolving their way of
doing it. O f course, we need not suppose that they reflect-inaction in the medium of words. More likely, they reflect
through a “ feel for the music" which is not unlike the pitcher’s
“ feel for the ball.”
Much reflection-in-action hinges on the experience of sur­
prise. W hen intuitive, spontaneous performance yields noth­
ing more than the results expected for it, then we tend not
to think about it. But when intuitive performance leads to sur­
prises, pleasing and promising or unwanted, we may respond
by reflecting-in-action. Like the baseball pitcher, we may re­
flect on our “ winning habits"; or like the jazz musician, on our
sense of the music we have been making; or like the designer,
on the misfit we have unintentionally created. In such process­
es, reflection tends to focus interactively on the outcomes of
action, the action itself, and the intuitive knowing implicit in
the action.
Let us consider an example which reveals these processes in
some detail.
In an article entitled “ If you want to get ahead, get a theo­
ry,” Inhelder and Karmiloff-Smith66 describe a rather unusual
experiment concerning “ children’s processes of discovery in ac­
tion.” 67 They asked their subjects to balance wooden blocks
on a metal bar. Some of the blocks were plain wooden blocks,
but others were conspicuously or inconspicuously weighted at
one end. The authors attended to the spontaneous processes
by which the children tried to learn about the properties of
the blocks, balance them on the bar, and regulate their actions
after success or failure.
They found that virtually all children aged six to seven began
the task in the same way:

56

From Technical Rationality to Reflection-in-Action
a ll blocks were systematically first tried at their geometric cen­
ter.68

And they found that slightly older children would not only
place all blocks at their geometric center but that
when asked to add small blocks of varying shapes and sizes to
blocks already in balance, they added up to ten blocks precariously
one on top of the other at the geometric center rather than distrib­
uting them at the extremities.69

They explain this persistent and virtually universal behavior by
attributing to the children what they call a “ theory-in-action” :
a “ geometric center theory” of balancing, or, as one child put
it, a theory that “ things always balance in the middle.”
O f course, when the children tried to balance the counterweighted blocks at their geometric centers, they failed. How
did they respond to failure? Some children made what the au­
thors called an “ action-response.”
They now placed the very same blocks more and more systemati­
cally at the geometric center, with only very slight corrections
around this point. They showed considerable surprise at not being
able to balance the blocks a second time (“ Heh, what's gone wrong
with this one, it worked before") . . . Action sequences then be­
came reduced to: Place carefully at geometric center, correct very
slightly around this center, abandon all attempts, declaring the ob­
ject “ impossible” to balance.70

Other children, generally between the ages of seven and eight,
responded in a very different way. W hen the counterweighted
blocks failed to balance at their geometric centers, these chil­
dren began to de-center them. They did this first with conspic­
uously counterweighted blocks. Then
gradually, and often almost reluctantly, the 7 to 8 year olds began
to make corrections also on the inconspicuous weight blocks

57

PROFESSIONAL KNOWLEDGE AND REFLECTION-IN-ACTION
. . . A t this point, we observed many pauses during action se­
quences on the inconspicuous weight items.71
L ater still,
As the children were now really beginning to question the general­
ity of their geometric center theory, a negative response at the geo­
metric center sufficed to have the child rapidly make corrections
toward the point of balance.72
A n d finally,
children paused before each item, roughly assessed the weight dis­
tribution of the block by lifting it {“you have to be careful, some­
times it's just as heavy on each side, sometimes it's heavier on one
side"), inferred the probable point of balance and then placed the
object immediately very close to it, without making any attempts
at first balancing at the geometric center.73
T h e children now behaved as though they had com e to hold
a theory-in-action that blocks balance, not at their geom etric
centers, bu t at their centers o f gravity.
T h is second pattern o f response to error, the authors call
“ theory-response.” C h ild ren work their way toward it through
a series o f stages. W h e n they are first confronted w ith a num ­
ber o f events w hich refute their geom etric cen ter theories-inaction, they stop and think. T h e n , starting w ith the conspicu­
ous-w eight blocks, they begin to m ake corrections away from
the geom etric center. Finally, w hen they have really aban­
doned their earlier theories-in-action, they w eigh all the blocks
in their hands so as to infer the probable point of balance. A s
they shift their theories o f balancing from geom etric cen ter
to cen ter o f gravity, they also shift from a “ success orien tation”
to a “ theory orien tation .” Positive and negative results com e

5*

From Technical Rationality to Reflection-in-Action
to be taken not as signs of success or failure in action but as
information relevant to a theory of balancing.
It is interesting to note that as the authors observe and de­
scribe this process, they are compelled to invent a language.
They describe theories-in-action which the children them­
selves cannot describe.
Indeed, although the (younger) child’s action sequences bear elo­
quent witness to a theory-in-action implicit in his behavior, this
should not be taken as a capacity to conceptualize explicitly on
what he is doing and why.74

Knowing-in-action which the child may represent to himself
in terms of a “ feel for the blocks,” the observers redescribe in
terms of “ theories.” I shall say that they convert the child’s
knowing-in-action to knowledge- in-action.
A conversion of this kind seems to be inevitable in any at­
tempt to talk about reflection-in-action. One must use words to
describe a kind of knowing, and a change of knowing, which are
probably not originally represented in words at all. Thus, from
their observations of the children’s behavior, the authors make
verbal descriptions of the children’s intuitive understandings.
These are the authors’ theories about the children’s knowing-in­
action. Like all such theories, they are deliberate, idiosyncratic
constructions, and they can be put to experimental test:
just as the child was constructing a theory-in-action in his endeavor
to balance the blocks, so we, too, were making on-the-spot hypoth­
eses about the child’s theories and providing opportunities for neg­
ative and positive responses in order to verify our own theories!75

Reflecting-in-practice The block-balancing experiment is a
beautiful example of reflection-in-action, but it is very far re­
moved from our usual images of professional practice. If we

59

PROFESSIONAL KNOWLEDGE AND REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

are to relate the idea of reflection-in-action to professional prac­
tice, we must consider what a practice is and how it is like and
unlike the kinds of action we have been discussing.
The word “ practice” is ambiguous. W hen we speak of a law­
yer’s practice, we mean the kinds of things he does, the kinds
of clients he has, the range of cases he is called upon to handle.
W hen we speak of someone practicing the piano, however, we
mean the repetitive or experimental activity by which he tries
to increase his proficiency on the instrument. In the first sense,
“ practice” refers to performance in a range of professional situ­
ations. In the second, it refers to preparation for performance.
But professional practice also includes an element of repeti­
tion. A professional practitioner is a specialist who encounters
certain types of situations again and again. This is suggested
by the way in which professionals use the word “ case”— or
project, account, commission, or deal, depending on the pro­
fession. All such terms denote the units which make up a prac­
tice, and they denote types of family-resembling examples.
Thus a physician may encounter many different “ cases of mea­
sles” ; a lawyer, many different “ cases of libel.” As a practitioner
experiences many variations of a small number of types of
cases, he is able to “ practice” his practice. He develops a reper­
toire of expectations, images, and techniques. He learns what
to look for and how to respond to what he finds. As long as
his practice is stable, in the sense that it brings him the same
types of cases, he becomes less and less subject to surprise. His
knowing-in-practice tends to become increasingly tacit, sponta­
neous, and automatic, thereby conferring upon him and his
clients the benefits of specialization.
On the other hand, professional specialization can have neg­
ative effects. In the individual, a high degree of specialization
can lead to a parochial narrowness of vision. W hen a profession

6o

From Technical Rationality to Reflection-in-Action
divides into subspecialties, it can break apart an earlier whole­
ness of experience and understanding. Thus people sometimes
yearn for the general practitioner of earlier days, who is
thought to have concerned himself with the “ whole patient,”
and they sometimes accuse contemporary specialists of treating
particular illnesses in isolation from the rest of the patient’s
life experience. Further, as a practice becomes more repetitive
and routine, and as knowing-in-practice becomes increasingly
tacit and spontaneous, the practitioner may miss important op­
portunities to think about what he is doing. He may find that,
like the younger children in the block-balancing experiment,
he is drawn into patterns of error which he cannot correct. And
if he learns, as often happens, to be selectively inattentive to
phenomena that do not fit the categories of his knowing-in­
action, then he may suffer from boredom or “burn-out” and
afflict his clients with the consequences of his narrowness and
rigidity. W hen this happens, the practitioner has “ overlearned” what he knows.
A practitioner’s reflection can serve as a corrective to over­
learning. Through reflection, he can surface and criticize the
tacit understandings that have grown up around the repetitive
experiences of a specialized practice, and can make new sense
of the situations of uncertainty or uniqueness which he may
allow himself to experience.
Practitioners do reflect on their knowing-in-practice. Some­
times, in the relative tranquility of a postmortem, they think
back on a project they have undertaken, a situation they have
lived through, and they explore the understandings they have
brought to their handling of the case. They may do this in a
mood of idle speculation, or in a deliberate effort to prepare
themselves for future cases.
But they may also reflect on practice while they are in the

61

PROFESSIONAL KNOWLEDGE AND REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

midst of it. Here they reflect-in-action, but the meaning of. this
term needs now to be considered in terms of the complexity
of knowing-in-practice.
A practitioner’s reflection-in-action may not be very rapid.
It is bounded by the “ action-present,” the zone of time in
which action can still make a difference to the situation. The
action-present may stretch over minutes, hours, days, or even
weeks or months, depending on the pace of activity and the
situational boundaries that are characteristic of the practice.
W ithin the give-and-take of courtroom behavior, for example,
a lawyer’s reflection-in-action may take place in seconds; but
when the context is that of an antitrust case that drags on over
years, reflection-in-action may proceed in leisurely fashion over
the course of several months. An orchestra conductor may
think of a single performance as a unit of practice, but in an­
other sense a whole season is his unit. The pace and duration
of episodes of reflection-in-action vary with the pace and dura­
tion of the situations of practice.
W hen a practitioner reflects in and on his practice, the possi­
ble objects of his reflection are as varied as the kinds of phe­
nomena before him and the systems of knowing-in-practice
which he brings to them. He may reflect on the tacit norms
and appreciations which underlie a judgment, or on the strate­
gies and theories implicit in a pattern of behavior. He may re­
flect on the feeling for a situation which has led him to adopt
a particular course of action, on the way in which he has framed
the problem he is trying to solve, or on the role he has con­
structed for himself within a larger institutional context.
Reflection-in-action, in these several modes, is central to the
art through which practitioners sometimes cope with the trou­
blesome “ divergent” situations of practice.
W hen the phenomenon at hand eludes the ordinary catego­
ries of knowledge-in-practice, presenting itself as unique or un­

62

From Technical Rationality to Reflection-in-Action
stable, the practitioner may surface and criticize his initial un­
derstanding of the phenomenon, construct a new description
of it, and test the new description by an on-the-spot experi­
ment. Sometimes he arrives at a new theory of the phenome­
non by articulating a feeling he has about it.
W hen he finds himself stuck in a problematic situation
which he cannot readily convert to a manageable problem, he
may construct a new way of setting the problem— a new frame
which, in what I shall call a “ frame experiment,” he tries to
impose on the situation.
W hen he is confronted with demands that seem incompati­
ble or inconsistent, he may respond by reflecting on the appre­
ciations which he and others have brought to the situation.
Conscious of a dilemma, he may attribute it to the way in
which he has set his problem, or even to the way in which he
has framed his role. He may then find a way of integrating,
or choosing among, the values at stake in the situation.
The following are brief examples of the kinds of reflectionin-action which I shall illustrate and discuss at greater length
later on.
An investment banker, speaking of the process by which he
makes his judgments of investment risk, observes that he really
cannot describe everything that goes into his judgments. The
ordinary rules of thumb allow him to calculate “ only 20 to 30
percent of the risk in investment.” In terms of the rules of
thumb, a company’s operating numbers may be excellent. Still,
if the management’s explanation of the situation does not fit
the numbers, or if there is something odd in the behavior of
the people, that is a subject for worry which must be considered
afresh in each new situation. He recalls a situation in which
he spent a day with one of the largest banks in Latin America.
Several new business proposals were made to him, and the
bank’s operating numbers seemed satisfactory. Still, he had a

63

PROFESSIONAL KNOWLEDGE AND REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

gnawing feeling that something was wrong. W hen he thought
about it, it seemed that he was responding to the fact that he
had been treated with a degree of deference out of all propor­
tion to his actual position in the international world of banking.
W hat could have led these bankers to treat him so inappropri­
ately? W hen he left the bank at the end of the day, he said
to his colleague, “ No new business with that outfit! Let the
existing obligations come in, but nothing new!” Some months
later, the bank went through the biggest bankruptcy ever in
Latin America— and all the time there had been nothing
wrong with the numbers.
An ophthalmologist says that a great many of his patients
bring problems that are not in the book. In 80 or 85 percent
of the cases, the patient’s complaints and symptoms do not fall
into familiar categories of diagnosis and treatment. A good
physician searches for new ways of making sense of such cases,
and invents experiments by which to test his new hypotheses.
In a particularly important family of situations, the patient suf­
fers simultaneously from two or more diseases. W hile each of
these, individually, lends itself to familiar patterns of thought
and action, their combination may constitute a unique case
that resists ordinary approaches to treatment.
The ophthalmologist recalls one patient who had inflamma­
tion of the eye (uveitis) combined with glaucoma. The treat­
ment for glaucoma aggravated the inflammation, and the treat­
ment for uveitis aggravated the glaucoma. W hen the patient
came in, he was already under treatment at a level insufficient
for cure but sufficient to irritate the complementary disease.
The ophthalmologist decided to remove all treatment and
wait to see what would emerge. The result was that the pa­
tient’s uveitis, a parasitic infection, remained in much reduced
form. On the other hand, the glaucoma disappeared altogeth­
er, thus proving to have been an artifact of the treatment. The

64

From Technical Rationality to Reflection-in-Action
opthalmologist then began to “ titrate” the patient. Working
with very small quantities of drugs, he aimed not at total cure
but at a reduction of symptoms which would allow the patient
to go back to work. (Seven lives depended on his 5000 ocular
cells!) T he prognosis was not good, for uveitis moves in cycles
and leaves scars behind which impede vision. But for the time
being, the patient was able to work.
In his mid-thirties, sometime between the composition of
his early work The Cossacks and his later War and Peace, Lev
Nikolayevitch Tolstoy became interested in education. He
started a school for peasant children on his estate at Yasnaya
Polanya, he visited Europe to learn the latest educational meth­
ods, and he published an educational journal, also called Yas­
naya Polanya. Before he was done (his new novel eventually
replaced his interest in education), he had built some seventy
schools, had created an informal teacher-training program, and
had written an exemplary piece of educational evaluation.
For the most part, the methods of the European schools
filled him with disgust, yet he was entranced by Rousseau’s
writings on education. His own school anticipated John
Dewey’s later approach to learning by doing, and bore the
stamp of his conviction that good teaching required “ not a
method but an art.” In an essay, “ On Teaching the Rudi­
ments,” he describes his notion of art in the teaching of
reading:
Every individual must, in order to acquire the art of reading in
the shortest possible time, be taught quite apart from any other,
and therefore there must be a separate method for each. That
which forms an insuperable difficulty to one does not in the least
keep back another, and vice versa. One pupil has a good memory,
and it is easier for him to memorize the syllables than to compre­
hend the vowellessness of the consonants; another reflects calmly
and will comprehend a most rational sound method; another has

PROFESSIONAL KNOWLEDGE AND REFLECTION-IN-ACTION
a fine instinct, and he grasps the law of word combinations by read­
ing whole words at a time.
The best teacher will be he who has at his tongue's end the expla­
nation of what it is that is bothering the pupil. These explanations
give the teacher the knowledge of the greatest possible number
of methods, the ability of inventing new methods and, above all,
not a blind adherence to one method but the conviction that all
methods are one-sided, and that the best method would be the
one which would answer best to all the possible difficulties incurred
by a pupil, that is, not a method but an art and talent.
. . . Every teacher must . . . by regarding every imperfection in
the pupil's comprehension, not as a defect of the pupil, but as a
defect of his own instruction, endeavor to develop in himself the
ability of discovering new methods . . . 76

An artful teacher sees a child's difficulty in learning to read
not as a defect in the child but as a defect "of his own instruc­
tion." So he must find a way of explaining what is bothering
the pupil. He must do a piece of experimental research, then
and there, in the classroom. And because the child's difficulties
may be unique, the teacher cannot assume that his repertoire
of explanations will suffice, even though they are "at the
tongue's end." He must be ready to invent new methods and
must "endeavor to develop in himself the ability of discovering
them."
Over the last two years, researchers at the Massachusetts In­
stitute of Technology have undertaken a program of in-service
education for teachers, a program organized around the idea
of on-the-spot reflection and experiment, very much as in Tol­
stoy's art of teaching. In this Teacher Project,77 the researchers
have encouraged a small group of teachers to explore their own
intuitive thinking about apparently simple tasks in such do­
mains as mathematics, physics, music, and the perceived be­
havior of the moon. The teachers have made some important
66

From Technical Rationality to Reflection-in-Action
discoveries. They have allowed themselves to become confused
about subjects they are supposed to “ know” ; and as they have
tried to work their way out of their confusions, they have also
begun to think differently about learning and teaching.
Early in the project, a critical event occured. The teachers
were asked to observe and react to a videotape of two boys en­
gaged in playing a simple game. The boys sat at a table, sepa­
rated from one another by an opaque screen. In front of one
boy, blocks of various colors, shapes, and sizes were arranged
in a pattern. In front of the other, similar blocks were lying
on the table in no particular order. T he first boy was to tell
the second one how to reproduce the pattern. After the first
few instructions, however, it became clear that the second boy
had gone astray. In fact, the two boys had lost touch with one
another, though neither of them knew it.
In their initial reactions to the videotape, the teachers spoke
of a “ communications problem.” They said that the instruc­
tion giver had “ well-developed verbal skills” and that the re­
ceiver was “ unable to follow directions.” Then one of the re­
searchers pointed out that, although the blocks contained no
green squares— all squares were orange and only triangles were
green— she had heard the first boy tell the second to “ take a
green square.” W hen the teachers watched the videotape
again, they were astonished. That small mistake had set off a
chain of false moves. The second boy had put a green thing,
a triangle, where the first boy’s pattern had an orange square,
and from then on all the instructions became problematic.
Under the circumstances, the second boy seemed to have dis­
played considerable ingenuity in his attempts to reconcile the
instructions with the pattern before him.
A t this point, the teachers reversed their picture of the situa­
tion. They could see why the second boy behaved as he did.
He no longer seemed stupid; he had, indeed, “ followed instruc&/

PROFESSIONAL KNOWLEDGE AND REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

tions.” As one teacher put it, they were now “ giving him rea­
son.” They saw reasons for his behavior; and his errors, which
they had previously seen as an inability to follow directions,
they now found reasonable.
Later on in the project, as the teachers increasingly chal­
lenged themselves to discover the meanings of a child’s puz­
zling behavior, they often spoke of “ giving him reason.”
In examples such as these, something falls outside the range
of ordinary expectations. The banker has a feeling that some­
thing is wrong, though he cannot at first say what it is. The
physician sees an odd combination of diseases never before de­
scribed in a medical text. Tolstoy thinks of each of his pupils
as an individual with ways of learning and imperfections pecu­
liar to himself. The teachers are astonished by the sense behind
a student’s mistake. In each instance, the practitioner allows
himself to experience surprise, puzzlement, or confusion in a
situation which he finds uncertain or unique. He reflects on
the phenomena before him, and on the prior understandings
which have been implicit in his behavior. He carries out an
experiment which serves to generate both a new understanding
of the phenomena and a change in the situation.
W hen someone reflects-in-action, he becomes a researcher
in the practice context. He is not dependent on the categories
of established theory and technique, but constructs a new the­
ory of the unique case. His inquiry is not limited to a delibera­
tion about means which depends on a prior agreement about
ends. He does not keep means and ends separate, but defines
them interactively as he frames a problematic situation. He
does not separate thinking from doing, ratiocinating his way
to a decision which he must later convert to action. Because
his experimenting is a kind of action, implementation is built
into his inquiry. Thus reflection-in-action can proceed, even

68

From Technical Rationality to Reflection-in-Action
in situations of uncertainty or uniqueness, because it is not
bound by the dichotomies of Technical Rationality.
Although reflection-in-action is an extraordinary process, it
is not a rare event. Indeed, for some reflective practitioners it
is the core of practice. Nevertheless, because professionalism
is still mainly identified with technical expertise, reflection-in­
action is not generally accepted— even by those who do it— as
a legitimate form of professional knowing.
Many practitioners, locked into a view of themselves as tech­
nical experts, find nothing in the world of practice to occasion
reflection. They have become too skillful at techniques of selec­
tive inattention, junk categories, and situational control, tech­
niques which they use to preserve the constancy of their knowledge-in-practice. For them, uncertainty is a threat; its
admission is a sign of weakness. Others, more inclined toward
and adept at reflection-in-action, nevertheless feel profoundly
uneasy because they cannot say what they know how to do,
cannot justify its quality or rigor.
For these reasons, the study of reflection-in-action is criti­
cally important. The dilemma of rigor or relevance may be dis­
solved if we can develop an epistemology of practice which
places technical problem solving within a broader context of
reflective inquiry, shows how reflection-in-action may be rigor­
ous in its own right, and links the art of practice in uncertainty
and uniqueness to the scientist’s art of research. W e may
thereby increase the legitimacy of reflection-in-action and en­
courage its broader, deeper, and more rigorous use.

69

Part II
PROFESSIONAL
CON TEXTS FOR
REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

Introduction

In the six chapters of part II, we will explore examples of pro­
fessional practice in the light of the following questions:
•

•

•

In practice of various kinds, what form does reflection-inaction take? W hat are the differences, and what features of
the process are similar?
Reflection-in-action may be directed to strategies, theories,
frames, or role frames. How do these processes interact with
one another, and how does technical problem solving relate
to them?
Is there a kind of rigor peculiar to reflection-in-action and, if
so, how is it like and unlike rigorous technical problem solving?

73

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION
W hat sets the limits of our ability to reflect-in-action? How
do individual and institutional constraints interact with one
another? And in what directions should we look to increase
the scope and depth of reflection-in-action?

In selecting cases of professional practice for exploration, I
have been guided by several considerations. I have looked for
a mix of “ hard” and “ soft” professions. I have chosen some
cases that exemplify reflection-in-action and others that exhibit
the limits to it. I have taken some examples from actual prac­
tice and some from records of professional education. In the
latter case, although the context is at one remove from actual
practice, there is the advantage that individuals tend to make
their reflection-in-action public.
I will begin, in chapters 3 and 4, with examples of reflectionin-action drawn from two very different professional practices,
architecture and psychotherapy, and in chapter 5 I will com­
pare the two examples. I shall describe there what I take to
be the general form of the process and some of the main
criteria of rigor appropriate to it.
In chapter 6 I will explore examples of the arts of engineer­
ing design and scientific research, in which I see further varia­
tions on the theme of reflection-in-action, and I will describe
the practice of an engineer who reflects-in-action on the socio­
political context of technical problem solving.
In chapter 7 I will show how the evolution of town planning
has influenced the context of practice, and how a practitioner’s
system of knowledge-in-practice hinges on his way of framing
his role. In this case, where a practitioner reflects on his strate­
gies of action but not on his framing of situation and role, we
will explore certain limits to the scope of reflection.
The field of management, which I will discuss in chapter

74

Introduction
8, has been powerfully influenced by management science and,
at the same time, by the persistent view of management as an
art. 1 will consider the art of management as a form of reflec­
tion-in-action.
Finally, in the conclusion to part II, I will review similarities
and differences in reflection-in-action across the professions
and criticize some familiar beliefs about the dangers of reflec­
tion and the limits to it.

75

3
Design as a
Reflective Conversation
with the Situation

The Design Professions
The family of design professions, of which architecture is the
best known, includes urban design (the design of urban places),
regional planning (concerned with the structure and ecology
of whole regions), and the type of town planning that produces
plans for the physical structures of cities. For many years, these
fields have been changing and in changing relationship to one
another. Architecture, once the mother profession, now occu­
pies a somewhat ambiguous position within the larger family.
In engineering there is also a family of design professions.

76

Design as a Reflective Conversation with the Situation
Product designers concern themselves with the structure and
appearance of industrial products. Industrial engineers design
the mechanisms and layouts of production processes. And engi­
neering specialists of various sorts design such large-scale prod­
ucts as ships, aircraft, dams, and roads.
In the last twenty years or so, the concept of design has
broadened. W e have begun to see cultural evolution as an in­
formal, collective, generational process of design, as in Chris
Alexander’s story of the Slovakian peasant shawls. Herbert
Simon and others have suggested that all occupations engaged
in converting actual to preferred situations are concerned with
design. Increasingly there has been a tendency to think of poli­
cies, institutions, and behavior itself, as objects of design.
It is questionable how far in this direction we ought to go.
W e risk ignoring or underestimating significant differences in
media, contexts, goals, and bodies of knowledge specific to the
professions. But we may also discover, at a deeper level, a ge­
neric design process which underlies these differences.
In this chapter I shall focus on design in the field of architec­
ture, which I have had a particularly good opportunity to study.
But architecture is worthy of study for other, less idiosyncratic
reasons. It is perhaps the oldest recognized design profession
and, as such, functions as prototype for design in other profes­
sions. If there is a fundamental process underlying the differ­
ences among design professions, it is in architecture that we
are most likely to find it.
The search is complicated, however, by the fact that the
boundaries of architecture are continually shifting, and even
among practices clearly labelled “ architecture” there are many
variations. The field of architecture proper has been con­
stricted by the emergence of newer professions such as plan­
ning, construction engineering, and landscape design. W ithin
architecture itself, following the long reign of the Beaux Arts

77

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

tradition in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries,
practitioners have tended to align themselves with a bewilder­
ing array of contending schools, each of which has laid claim
to architecture.
Some of these schools have consciously returned to historical
precedents, such as the Italian hill towns or the Gothic cathe­
drals. Others have formed around the stylistic innovations and
methods of great men such as Le Corbusier, Wright, Kahn,
Aalto, and Mies van der Rohe. Some deplore the intrusions
of contemporary technologies and commercial forms, while
others celebrate the artifacts of contemporary American cul­
ture. Some have aspired to simplicity and purity of design or
to the craftsmanlike use of materials, while others exploit the
technological possibilities of industrial building technology or
the rich cultural store of American vernacular. Some have re­
acted against the formalism of the dominant styles, treating
design as a social process which should respond to the needs
and preferences of the people who live and work in buildings.
For a student of the field— and perhaps even more for a stu­
dent in the field— the multiplicity of voices is confusing. How
should we regard the controversies among the contending
schools? Should we take them as competing definitions of the
field, which entail very different concepts of professional
knowledge and practice? Or as stylistic variations of a design
process that is essentially the same for all schools?
In the following pages, I shall draw from a particular exam­
ple a description of designing which underlies the differences
among schools and suggests a generic process shared by the var­
ious design professions. I shall consider designing as a conversa­
tion with the materials of a situation.
A designer makes things. Sometimes he makes the final
product; more often, he makes a representation— a plan, pro­
gram, or image— of an artifact to be constructed by others. He

78

Design as a Reflective Conversation with the Situation
works in particular situations, uses particular materials, and em­
ploys a distinctive medium and language. Typically, his making
process is complex. There are more variables— kinds of possible
moves, norms, and interrelationships of these— than can be
represented in a finite model. Because of this complexity, the
designer’s moves tend, happily or unhappily, to produce conse­
quences other than those intended. W hen this happens, the
designer may take account of the unintended changes he has
made in the situation by forming new appreciations and under­
standings and by making new moves. He shapes the situation,
in accordance with his initial appreciation of it, the situation
“ talks back,” and he responds to the situation’s back-talk.
In a good process of design, this conversation with the situa­
tion is reflective. In answer to the situation’s back-talk, the de­
signer reflects-in-action on the construction of the problem,
the strategies of action, or the model of the phenomena, which
have been implicit in his moves.

An Example of Reflective Designing
In the remainder of this chapter, I shall use a particular exam­
ple of architectural designing to explore the reflective conversa­
tion which underlies the variety of schools of architecture.
I have drawn a case from a design studio,1 a type of profes­
sional education, traditional in schools of architecture, in
which students undertake a design project under the supervi­
sion of a master designer. In the case I have selected, the studio
master, Quist, reviews the work of one of his students, Petra.2
This review takes place early in the semester. Its setting is
the loft-like studio space in which each of the twenty students
has arranged his own drawing tables, papers, books, pictures,
and models. This is the space in which students spend much

79

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

of their working lives, at times talking together, but mostly en­
gaged in private, parallel pursuit of the common design task.
A t the beginning of the semester, Quist gave all of the students
a “ program” — a set of design specifications, in this case, for
the design of an elementary school, and a graphic description
of the site on which the school is to be built.
In the course of the semester, each student is to develop his
own version of the design, recording his results in preliminary
sketches, working drawings, and models. At the end of the se­
mester, there will be a “ crit” at which the students present
their designs to Quist and to a group of outside critics (the
“ jury” ). A t intervals throughout the semester Quist holds de­
sign reviews with each student, and it is just such a review
which Quist, in our protocol, conducts with Petra.
Here it is Quist who reflects on Petra’s initial designing. For
several weeks Petra has worked on the early phases of her de­
sign, and she has prepared some drawings. Quist examines
these drawings, while Petra describes how she is stuck— how
she has set problems that she cannot solve.
After a while, Quist places a sheet of tracing paper over
Petra’s sketches and begins to draw over her drawing. As he
draws, he talks. He says, for example,
The kindergarten might go over here . . . then you might carry
the gallery level through— and look down into here . . .

But as Quist says these things he also draws, placing the kinder­
garten “ here” in the drawing, making the line that “ carries the
gallery level through.” His words do not describe what is al­
ready there on the paper but parallel the process by which he
makes what is there. Drawing and talking are parallel ways of
designing, and together make up what I will call the language
of designing.

80

Design as a Reflective Conversation with the Situation
T he verbal and non-verbal dimensions are closely connected.
Quist’s lines are unclear in their reference except insofar as he
says what they mean. His words are obscure except insofar as
Petra can connect them with the lines of the drawing. His talk
is full of dychtic utterances— “ here,” “ this,” “ that”— which
Petra can interpret only by observing his movements. In our
interpretation of the protocol, we must reconstruct Quist’s
pointing and drawing, referring to the sketches which accom­
pany the transcript and, on occasion, making new sketches
which clarify Quist’s meanings.
W hether Quist and Petra speak in words or drawings, their
utterances refer to spatial images which they try to make con­
gruent with one another. As they become more confident that
they have achieved congruence of meaning, their dialogue
tends to become elliptical and inscrutable to outsiders.
The language of designing is a language for doing architec­
ture, a language game3 which Quist models for Petra, display­
ing for her the competences he would like her to acquire. But
Quist’s discourse is also punctuated by parentheses in which
he talks about designing. He says, for example,
You should begin with a discipline, even if it is arbitrary . . .

and again,
T he principle is that you work simultaneously from the unit and
from the total and then go in cycles . . .

These are examples of a language about designing, a meta­
language by means of which Quist describes some features of
the process he is demonstrating and with which he introduces
Petra, however cursorily, to reflection on the action of design­
ing.
In the protocol which follows, both kinds of language are
intertwined.

81

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

The protocol This design review lasts for about twenty min­
utes, and may be divided into several phases. In the first of
these, Petra presents her preliminary sketches and describes
the problems she has encountered. Quist then focuses on one
of these problems. He reframes it in his own terms and pro­
ceeds to demonstrate the working out of a design solution.
There follows a brief interval of reflection on the demonstra­
tion to date. Quist then sets out the next steps Petra will have
to undertake, including one (the calibration of the grid) which
leads him to try to get her to look differently at the representa­
tion of slopes. There is, finally, a coda of reflection on all that
has gone before.
Petra’s presentation. Petra: I am having trouble getting past
the diagrammatic phase— I’ve written down the problems on this
list.
I’ve tried to butt the shape of the building into the contours of
the land there— but the shape doesn’t fit into the slope.
[She has a model with a slightly exaggerated slope; they discuss
this.]
I chose the site because it would relate to the field there but the
approach is here. So I decided the gym must be here— so [showing
rough layout] I have the layout like this.

82

Design as a Reflective Conversation with the Situation
Quist:
Petra:

q:

p:

Q:

W hat other big prob­
lems?
1 had six of these class­
room units, but they were
too small in scale to do
much with. So I changed
them to this much more
significant layout (the L
shapes). It relates one to
two, three to four, and
five to six grades, which is
more what I wanted to do
educationally
anyway.
W hat I have here is a
space in here which is
more of a home base. Til
have an outside/outside
which can be used and an
outside/inside which can
be used— then that opens
into your resource library/
language thing.

This is to scale?
Yes.
Okay, say we have introduced scale.
But in the new setup, what about north-south?
[He draws his orientation diagram]

S3

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

F IG U R E 3.1

Petra has taken the contours of the land seriously, accepting
the norm that building shape and land contours must fit one
another. In her sketches she has tried the experiment of “ but­
ting” the shape of her building into the contours of the slope,
but the experiment has failed; hence the problem.
Petra has also experimented with the size and arrangement
of her classroom units. She has found that classrooms must
reach a threshold of scale in order to be “ significant” enough
for design. By regrouping the six smaller classroom units into
three large L-shaped ones, she has tried for “ more significant
scale.” But in doing so, she has also put next to one another
the spaces which contain the people who ought most to en­
counter one another, and she has created a “ home base,”
which sounds like a good place to be, a private outer space

84

Design as a Reflective Conversation with the Situation
which can be used by the kids, and an inner space which has
to do, perhaps, with the circulation of the school.
Q uist’s reframing of the problem, q : N o w this would allow
you one private orientation from here and it would generate geom­
etry in this direction. It would be a parallel . . .
p:
Yes, I’d thought of twenty feet . . .
Q:
You should begin with a discipline, even if it is arbitrary, be­
cause the site is so screwy— you can always break it open later.
The main problem, in Quist’s view, is not that of fitting the
shape of the building to the slope; the site is too “ screwy” for
that. Instead, coherence must be given to the site in the form
of a geometry— a “ discipline” — which can be imposed upon
it. In the remainder of this phase of the protocol, Quist plays
out the consequences of such a move.
Quist’s demonstration will now center on the new problem
of coordinating the constructed geometry with the “ screwy”
contours of the slope. But the geometry can be “ broken open”
again. I think this means that you can dissolve the original dis­
cipline in order to try another one, and that you can later make
knowing violations of the initial geometry. In Quist’s meta­
phor, the geometry is a sort of armor which can be broken open
in places, once it has been constructed. He will speak often
of the need to “ soften” a consistent discipline by consciously
departing from it.
Q uist’s demonstration, q : N o w in this direction, that being
the gully and that the hill, that could then be the bridge, which
might generate an upper level which could drop down two ways.
[One way from the classrooms] W e get a total differential poten­
tial here from one end of classroom to far end of the other. There
is 15 feet max, right?— so we could have as much as 5-foot inter-

85

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

86

Design as a Reflective Conversation with the Situation

87

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION
vais, which for a kid is maximum height, right? The section
through here could be one of nooks in here and the differentiation
between this unit and this would be at two levels.

The sketches in figure 3.1 will help to make clear what is going
on in this passage. Quist now proceeds to play out the imposi­
tion of the two-dimensional geometry of the L-shaped class­
rooms upon the “ screwy” three-dimensional contours of the
slope. The L-shaped classrooms are carved into the slope, as
in sketch A. The “ differentiation potential,” as shown in the
sectional sketch B, is from the near end of the classroom lying
highest on the slope to the far end of the classroom which is
lowest on the slope. The “ 15 feet max” is given by the total
drop in the slope over the distance represented by the three
classrooms. The slope is now divided into three levels, one for
each of the classrooms, as in B. C shows the “ interval” from
the ground on one level to the roof of the classroom which
stands on the next lower level. The roofs of the classroom will
rise five feet above the ground at the next level up, and since
five feet is “ maximum height for a kid,” kids will be able to
be in “ nooks,” as in sketch C , which are approximately as high
as the tallest kid.
A drawing experiment has been conducted, and its outcome
partially confirms Quist’s way of setting the L-shaped class­
rooms upon the incoherent slope. Classrooms now flow down
the slope in three stages, creating protected spaces “ maximum
height for a kid” at each level. These Quist sees as “ nooks,”
something he could not have done had the level difference
come to very much less or more than five feet. T o say that the
section “ could be one of nooks” is to invest these spaces with
a special kind of value made possible by the level differences,
and it is this which partially confirms Quist’s earlier move.

88

Design as a Reflective Conversation with the Situation
q :

Now you would give preference to that as a precinct which
opens out into here and into here and then, of course, we'd
have a wall— on the inside there could be a wall or steps to
relate in downward. W ell, that either happens here or here,
and you'll have to investigate which way it should or can go.
If it happens this way, the gallery is northwards— but I think
the gallery might be a kind of garden— a sort of soft back
area to these.
The kindergarten might go over here— which might indicate
that the administration over here— just sort of like what you
have here— then this works slightly with the contours—

The “ nooks” open out into “ precincts” whose treatment is a
new problem. Retaining walls are required at each level, as in
D, but they also mark the different levels. Walls or steps now
function as punctuation, marking boundaries and relationships.
Quist invites Petra to consider the gallery as a “ soft back area,”
as in sketch D, which would go well with the “ hard” class­
rooms. It can also be “ a kind of garden.”
The resulting array— L-shaped classrooms, gallery, kinder­
garten, and administration— now “ works slightly” with the
contours of the slope. W ith this, Quist harks back to his re­
framing of Petra's original problem. W hen she couldn't butt
the shape of the buildings into the screwy slope, Quist imposed
on it a geometry of parallels suggested by the L-shaped class­
rooms. Now the resulting configuration “ works slightly” with
them. The fit is not very strong, but it is enough.
q:

Then you might carry the gallery level through— and look
down into here— which is nice.
Let the land generate some sub-ideas here, which could be
very nice. Maybe the cafeteria needn't be such a formal func­
tion— maybe it could come into here to get summer sun here
and winter here.

89

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION
p :

q:

p :

N ow this gallery is more a general pass-through that anyone
can use.
It's a general pass-through that anyone has the liberty to pass
through, but it is not a corridor. It marks a level difference
from here to here— it might have steps or ramp up to it.
M y concern is that the circulation through this way— the gal­
lery is generating something awfully cute, but how to pass
through here [the library space]?

[More examples of Quist answering questions before they are
asked]
Q:

So don’t think of the auditorium as a hard-edged block there.

Quist draws the extension of the gallery as he voices its possibil­
ity, imagining the experience of a person who would be follow­
ing such a path, and he finds the result “ nice,” once more cre­
ating a confirmation of the string of moves made to date.
Petra has not “ let” the cafeteria diverge from its regular geo­
metric shape. He invites her to “ soften it” by taking advantage
of the site's north-south orientation which will cause the sun
to fall on the slope at different angles in summer and winter,
as in sketch E. Similarly, he invites her to “ soften” the audito­
rium by relating it to nearby spaces.
Intermediate reflection, p : W here I was hung up was with the
original shape; this here makes much more sense.
Q:
Much more sense— so that what you have in gross terms is
this [he points to his gallery]. It is an artifice— the sort of
thing Aalto would invent just to give it some order. He’s done
that on occasion. So in a very minor way, that is the major
thing. This repetitive thing in an organized way— there is
this which is not repetitive. It is very nice and just the right
scale. It also has a sort of verbal order that you could explain
to someone.

90

Design as a Reflective Conversation with the Situation
The gallery, which had begun in Petra's mind as a minor
element of the design, a “ general pass-through," has now be­
come “ in a minor way . . . the major thing." Quist's refram­
ing and reworking of the problem have led to a reapprecia­
tion of the situation, which he now evaluates in terms of
norms drawn from several domains— form, scale, and verbal
explainability.
Next steps, q : Now you have to think about the size of this
middle area. You should have the administration over here.
p :
W ell, that does sort of solve the problems I had with the ad­
ministration blocking access to the gym.
Q:
No good, horrible— it just ruins the whole idea— but if you
move it over there, it is in a better location and opens up
the space.
The size of the middle area (not its detailed design) can come
up now that they have solved the big problem of adapting the
geometry of the classrooms to the screwy slope. In the middle
area, they are again concerned with the location of major pro­
grammatic elements in relation to one another. And with his
criticism of the position of the administration, Quist implies
that everything he has so far done— the construction of a basic
geometry, the imposition of that geometry upon the slope, the
creation of the gallery— constitutes an internally coherent
whole, all moves having been made with fidelity to the implica­
tions set up by earlier moves.
Q:
p

:

Q:

Now the calibration of this becomes important. You just have
to draw and draw and try out different grids.
W ell, there seemed to be a strange correlation between the
two.
No— look at it sideways. It looks much steeper in sections.
You see, sections always seem much steeper in reality. Try

9*

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION
driving up a ten-degree road— you think you would never
make it [draws his slope, diagram]

Cod a, p : Yes, this was the main thing to get down— how that
basic unit— I was thinking in much closer terms coming through
the thing.
q:
[Cuts her off] Yeah, and the other thing is the subjection to
a common set of geometry. You'll see that that will be a com­
mon problem which will come up with everyone, either too
much constraint or not enough. How to do that, that is the
problem of this problem.
p :
It’s amazing— intuitively you look at the shape and you know
it's wrong, but it's very hard to get down to the reason
q:

Q:

Yeah, well, that is what you are here for. So— I'd worry about
the basic geometry on the site. I wouldn't concentrate on the
roof.
The principle is that you work simultaneously from the unit
and from the total and then go in cycles— back and forth,
back and forth— which is what you've done a couple of times
stutteringly. You have some ideas of the whole which is the
grid thing, but you don't know its dimensions. You've done
something about this by eliminating that idea, which 1 think
is a good decision. You keep going on— you are going to make
it.

Quist returns to his earlier theme (“ You should begin with a
discipline, even if it is arbitrary"), but now develops it. The
basic geometry should bind the designer, but under a norm of

9*

Design as a Reflective Conversation with the Situation
moderation. And in fact Quist has continually urged Petra to
“ soften” her “ hard” geometric forms and to depart on occasion
from the basic geometry— but only after it has been estab­
lished.
Quist has been able to give Petra reasons for her intuitions.
Now he makes a basic design principle explicit: attention must
oscillate between the “ whole” and the “ unit,” the global and
the local. Under the metaphor of designing as speaking, Quist
contrasts her “ stuttering” with his own smooth delivery.

Analysis of the Protocol
Quist’s designing takes the form of a reflective conversation
with the situation.
A t the beginning of the review, Petra is stuck:
I’ve tried to butt the shape of the building into the contours of
the land there— but the shape doesn’t fit into the slope.

Quist criticizes her framing of the problem, pointing out that
she has tried to fit the shapes of the buildings into the contours
of a “ screwy” slope which offers no basis for coherence. In­
stead, he resets her problem:
You should begin with a discipline, even if it is arbitrary . . . you
can always break it open later.

Petra should make the screwy site coherent by imposing on
it a discipline of her own, a “ what if” to be adopted in order
to discover its consequences. If these are unsatisfactory, she
can always “ break it open later.”
From “ you should begin with a discipline” to “ this works

93

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

slightly with the contours,” Quist plays out the consequences
of the new discipline by carving the geometry into the slope.
In the medium of sketch and spatial-action language, he repre­
sents buildings on the site through moves which are also experi­
ments. Each move has consequences described and evaluated
in terms drawn from one or more design domains. Each has
implications binding on later moves. And each creates new
problems to be described and solved. Quist designs by spinning
out a web of moves, consequences, implications, appreciations,
and further moves.
Once the smaller classroom units have been made into Lshaped aggregates, they are “ more satisfactory in scale,” “ put
grade one next to grade two,” and imply (“ generate” ) a “ geom­
etry of parallels in this direction.” Given these changes, Quist
invents a new move: “ that being the gully and that the hill,
that could then be the bridge.” The bridge also generates
something new, an upper level which “ could drop down two
ways.”
Each move is a local experiment which contributes to the
global experiment of reframing the problem. Some moves are
resisted (the shapes cannot be made to fit the contours), while
others generate new phenomena. As Quist reflects on the unex­
pected consequences and implications of his moves, he listens
to the situation’s back talk, forming new appreciations which
guide his further moves. Most significantly, he becomes aware
that the gallery he has created, the “ soft back area” to the Lshaped classrooms, has become “ in a minor way . . . the major
thing.” Seizing on the gallery’s potential, he “ extends it here
so as to look down into here.” Later, he carefully avoids placing
the administration building on the site in a way that would
spoil “ the whole idea.”
Thus the global experiment in reframing the problem is also

94

Design as a Reflective Conversation with the Situation
a reflective conversation with the situation in which Quist
cornes to appreciate and then to develop the implications of
a new whole idea. The reframing of the problem is justified
by the discovery that the new geometry “ works slightly with
the contours,” yields pleasant nooks, views, and soft back areas,
and evokes in the situation the potential for a new coherence.
Out of his reframing of Petra’s problem, Quist derives a prob­
lem he can solve and a coherent organization of materials from
which he can make something that he likes.
Three dimensions of this process are particularly notewor­
thy: the domains of language in which the designer describes
and appreciates the consequences of his moves, the implica­
tions he discovers and follows, and his changing stance toward
the situation with which he converses.
Design domains. Quist makes his moves in a language of de­
signing which combines drawing and speaking. In this lan­
guage, words have different roles. W hen Quist speaks of a cafe­
teria that could “ come down into here to get summer sun
here,” “ an upper level [which could] drop down two ways,”
“ steps to relate in downward,” he uses spatial action language.
He attributes actions to elements of the design as though they
were creating form and organizing space. A t the same time,
he anticipates the experienced felt-path4 of a user of the build­
ing who could find that the upper level drops down or that
the steps relate in downwards. Quist also uses words to name
elements of the design (“ steps,” a “ wall,” an “ administra­
tion” ), to describe the consequences and implications of moves
and to reappreciate the situation.
Elements of the language of designing can be grouped into
clusters, of which I have identified twelve (figure 3.2). These
design domains contain the names of elements, features, rela­
tions, and actions, and of norms used to evaluate problems,

95

F IG U R E 3.2

Normative Design Domains

P ro g ram /U sc

E x a m p le s

D e fin itio n s

D o m a in s

F u n c tio n s o f b u ild in g s o r

“ g y m ,” “ a u d ito riu m ,”

b u ild in g c o m p o n e n ts ;

“ cla ss ro o m ” ; “ 5 ', w h ic h

uses o f b u ild in g s o r site;

is m a x im u m h e ig h t fo r a

sp e c ific a tio n s fo r use

k id ” ; “ n o c it y w ill p lo w
a road th a t s te e p ”

S it in g

F e a tu re s e le m e n ts,

" la n d c o n to u r ,” “ s lo p e ,”

re la tio n s o f th e b u ild in g

“ h ill,” " g u lly ”

s ite

B u ild in g E le m e n ts

B u ild in g s o r c o m p o n e n ts

“ g y m ," “ k in d e r g a r te n ,”

o f b u ild in g s

“ r a m p ,” “ w a ll,” “ r o o f,”
“ ste p s ”

O r g a n iz a tio n o f S p a c e

F o rm

S t r u c t u r e / T e c h n o lo g y

K in d s o f sp a ce s an d

“ a g e n e ra l p a ss-th ro u g h ,”

re la tio n s o f sp a ces to o n e

“ o u ts id e / o u ts id c ,”

a n o th e r

“ la y o u t”

1) S h a p e o f b u ild in g o r

“ h a rd -e d g e d b lo c k ,”

com p o n en t

“ a g e o m e tr y o f

2) G e o m e t r y

p ara llels,”

3) M a rk in g s o f

“ m ark s a le v e l d iffe r e n c e

o rg a n iz a tio n o f s p a c e

fro m h e re to h e r e ,”

4 ) E x p e r ie n c e d fe lt-p a th

“ carry t h e g a lle ry

o f m o v e m e n t th ro u g h

th ro u g h a n d lo o k d o w n

sp a ces

in to h e re , w h ic h is n ic e ”

S tru c tu re s , te c h n o lo g ie s,

“ a c o n s tru c tio n m o d u le

a n d p ro cesse s u sed in

fo r th e s e (c la ssro o m s)”

b u ild in g

S c a le

M a g n itu d e s o f b u ild in g

“ a 20 ' p a ra lle l,” “ to o

a n d e le m e n ts in relatio n

sm a ll in sca le to d o

t o o n e a n o th e r

m u c h w it h ,” “ ju st th e
rig h t s c a le ”

C ost

D o lla r c o s t o f

( n o n e in th is p ro to c o l)

c o n s tru c tio n

B u ild in g C h a r a c t e r

P reced en t

R e p re s e n ta tio n

K in d o f b u ild in g , as sig n

( “ w a re h o u s e ,” “ h a n g a r,”

o f sty le o r m o d e o f

“ b each co tta g e ” — b u t

b u ild in g

n o t in th is p ro to c o l)

R e fe r e n c e to o th e r k in d s

“ an a rtific e . . . th e sort

o f b u ild in g s , styles, o r

o f t h in g A a lt o w o u ld

a r c h ite c tu r a l m o d e s

in v e n t”

L a n g u a g e s a n d n o ta tio n s

“ lo o k a t it in s e c tio n ,”

b y w h ic h e le m e n ts o f

“ V i6 sca le m o d e l”

o th e r d o m a in s a re
re p re s e n te d

E x p la n a tio n

C o n t e x t o f in te ra c tio n

“ th e so rt o f v e rb a l o rd e r

b e tw e e n d e s ig n e r a n d

y o u c o u ld e x p la in to

o th e r s

so m eo n e”

Design as a Reflective Conversation with the Situation
consequences, and implications. As he designs, Quist draws on
a repertoire of design domains to fulfill a variety of construc­
tive, descriptive, and normative functions.
In the domain of program/use, for example, such terms as
“ classroom,” “ administration,” and “ kindergarten” name
buildings according to their uses. Phrases like “ maximum
height for a kid” and “ how to pass through . . . the library
space” describe the experience of using the buildings.
In the siting domain, Petra uses “ contours of the land” to
describe her problem, and Quist uses “ hill,” “ gully,” and
“ slope” to construct some of the early steps by which he carves
the geometry into the slope.
In the domain of organization of space, Petra speaks of the
“outside/outside” created by her L-shaped classrooms, and
Quist characterizes the gallery as “ a general pass-through that
anyone has the liberty to pass through, b u t .. . not a corridor.”
The domain of form has four meanings, distinct but interre­
lated. First there are the geometrical shapes of buildings, like
Petra’s “ hard-edged block.” There is also the sense of global
geometry, as in “ the geometry of parallels generated by the Lshaped classrooms.” There is form as a visible sign of the organ­
ization of space, as in Quist’s observation that the gallery marks
level differences in the slope. And finally, there are frequent
references to the felt-paths of those who will travel through
the organized space, apprehending the figures, qualities, and
relations which arise in the experience of movement from place
to place.
In their appreciations of the situation they are shaping,
Quist and Petra employ feelingful or associative terms such as
“ home base,” “ nook,” “ garden,” and “ soft back area.” “ A kind
of garden” is not literally a garden, and the “ soft back area”
is not literally soft, but the metaphors of “ garden” and “ soft”
are used to convey particular values of experience.

97

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

Often moves are found to have consequences and implica­
tions that cut across design domains. The retaining walls are
necessary to the structural soundness of the buildings carved
into the slope, but they also mark off formal differences in the
levels of the slope. The gallery, which Petra finds “ awfully
cute,” also creates problems of circulation. W hen design terms
are ambiguous in this way, they may create confusion, but they
also call attention to multiple consequences. Terms like “ stair,”
“ ramp,” and “ wall” refer both to particular building elements
and to formal functions such as “ marking” and “ relating in.”
“ Gallery” refers both to an organization of space and to a par­
ticular precedent (“ the sort of thing Aalto would invent” ). As­
piring members of the linguistic community of design learn
to detect multiple reference, distinguish particular meanings
in context, and use multiple reference as an aid to vision across
design domains.
The designer's repertoire of domains has a structure of prior­
ities for attending to. features of situations. In our protocol,
there are many references to organization of space, especially
to the location of major building elements such as the gym,
turning circle, bridge, and kindergarten. There are several ref­
erences to scale, building elements, program/use, and the sev­
eral senses of form. But there are only single references in each
of the domains of precedent, structure/technology, and expla­
nation. The domains of cost and building character do not ap­
pear in the protocol at all. The relative frequency of reference
to design domains reveals Quist’s priorities for attention at this
early stage of the process.
Implications. W hen Petra says,
This is the road coming in here, and I figured the turning circle
would be somewhere here . . .

&

Design as a Reflective Conversation with the Situation
and when Quist later remarks that
the kindergarten might go over here— which might indicate that
the administration [goes] over here

they are noting the implications of earlier moves for later ones,
on the basis of a system of norms that governs the relative
placement of major building elements. This system includes
norms for access (the administration building’s central accessi­
bility to all other units), circulation (ease and clarity of move­
ment from one unit to another), and use (“ opening up the
space” ). Thus a decision to locate a road or a kindergarten
“ here” has implications for the location of a turning circle or
an administration “ there.” In this sense, there is a literal logic
of design, a pattern of “ i f . . . then” propositions that relates
the cumulative sequence of prior moves to the choices now
confronting the designer.
Because of the contextual relatedness of norms drawn from
the domains of site, program, geometry, felt-path, structure,
and the like, the designer’s moves yield systems of implications.
These constitute a discipline. If Petra chooses to “ locate the
site here because it would relate to the field there . . . [and]
the approach is here,” then “ the gym must be here.” As Quist
says, however, a discipline can always be broken open later. The
implications of prior moves must generally be honored but may
be violated on occasion if they are violated in a knowledgeable
way.
The web of moves has many branchings, which complicates
the problem of discovering and honoring implications. Given
the layering of the classrooms on the slope, for example, there
could be “ a wall or steps to relate in downwards” which might
“ happen here or here.” These are choice-points. As he reflectsin-action on the situation created by his earlier moves, the de­

99

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

signer must consider not only the present choice but the tree
of further choices to which it leads, each of which has different
meanings in relation to the systems of implications set up by
earlier moves. Quist’s virtuosity lies in his ability to string out
design webs of great complexity. But even he cannot hold in
mind an indefinitely expanding web. A t some point, he must
move from a “ what if?” to a decision which then becomes a
design node with binding implications for further moves. Thus
there is a continually evolving system of implications within
which the designer reflects-in-action.
The testing of local moves is partly linked to, and partly inde­
pendent of, this system of implications. Quist discovers that
the three classroom levels carved into the slope yield a “ total
differentiation potential of fifteen feet maximum” which
would permit “ as much as five-foot intervals” and he subse­
quently notices that these spaces, seen in section, could be
made into “ nooks.” Here he affirms a local move because he
finds that it has produced a situation out of which he can make
something that he likes. In this he makes use of his knowledge
of the relations between slopes of various grades and their uses.
But he finds further support for the dimensions of the geome­
try he has carved into the slope when he discovers that the re­
sulting configuration “ works slightly with the contours.” His
method of carving the geometry of the classrooms into the
slope is affirmed in one way when he sees it as a local experi­
ment and in another way when he sees it as part of a global
experiment.
Moves also lead to the apprehension of new problems such
as the treatment of the “ precincts” which flow out from the
nooks, and they lead to new potentials for the creation of desir­
able artifacts such as the softening of the hard-edged shape of
the cafeteria by allowing it to “ come down into here to get
summer sun here and winter sun here.” In the designer’s con-

100

Design as a Reflective Conversation with the Situation
versation with the materials of his design, he can never make
a move which has only the effects intended for it. His materials
are continually talking back to him, causing him to apprehend
unanticipated problems and potentials. As he appreciates such
new and unexpected phenomena, he also evaluates the moves
that have created them.
Thus the designer evaluates his moves in a threefold way:
in terms of the desirability of their consequences judged in cat­
egories drawn from the normative design domains, in terms
of their conformity to or violation of implications set up by
earlier moves, and in terms of his appreciation of the new prob­
lems or potentials they have created.
Shifts in stance. As Quist spins out his web of moves, his
stance toward the design situation undergoes a series of
changes.
Sometimes he speaks of what “ can” or “ might” happen, and
sometimes of what “ should” or “ must” happen. He shifts from
a recognition of possibility and freedom of choice to an accep­
tance of the imperatives which follow from choice. He urges
Petra to step into the problem freely, imposing her own con­
structs upon it. W ithout this freedom, there can be no “ what
if?” But he also calls attention to the discipline of implications
generated by her moves. The geometry of the L-shaped class­
rooms must be followed. Degrees of slope imply constraints
on possible uses of the site. Implications for access to sun, cir­
culation, boundary marking, nook-ness, street plowing, consis­
tency of scale, access to gym or administration, fate of trees,
are at stake in a relatively uncomplicated series of moves. As
Quist draws out these implications, he demonstrates fidelity
to the “ musts” by which the freely chosen “ what ifs?” are to
be judged.
He also demonstrates how the whole is at stake in every par­
tial move. Once a whole idea has been created, a bad place­

101

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

ment of the administration can ruin it. Hence the designer
must oscillate between the unit and the total, and— as Quist
points out in one of his infrequent meta-comments— he must
oscillate between involvement and detachment. Quist be­
comes at times so involved in the local development of forms
that the design appears to be making itself. But he also steps
back from the projected experience of passage through the
space in order to take note of the larger relationships on which
the qualities of the whole idea will depend.
Finally, as he cycles through iterations of moves and appreci­
ations of the outcomes of moves, Quist shifts from tentative
adoption of a strategy to eventual commitment. This shift en­
ables him to achieve economy of design, simplifying the evolv­
ing web of moves to make his thought-experiment manageable.

The Underlying Process of Reflection-in-Action
Petra’s problem solving has led her to a dead end. Quist reflects
critically on the main problem she has set, reframes it, and pro­
ceeds to work out the consequences of the new geometry he
has imposed on the screwy site. The ensuing inquiry is a global
experiment, a reflection-in-action on the restructured problem.
Quist spins out a web of moves, subjecting each cluster of
moves to multiple evaluations drawn from his repertoire of de­
sign domains. As he does so, he shifts from embracing freedom
of choice to acceptance of implications, from involvement in
the local units to a distanced consideration of the resulting
whole, and from a stance of tentative exploration to one of
commitment. He discovers in the situation’s back-talk a whole
new idea which generates a system of implications for further
102

Design as a Reflective Conversation with the Situation
moves. His global experiment is also a reflective conversation
with the situation.
It is not difficult to see how a design process of this form
might underlie differences of language and style associated
with the various schools of architecture. Designers might dif­
fer, for example, with respect to the priorities they assign to
design domains at various stages of the process. They might
focus less on the global geometry of buildings, as Quist does,
than on the site or on the properties and potentials of materials.
They might let the design depend more heavily on the formal
implications of construction modules. Their governing images
might be framed in terms of building character, and they
might allow particular precedents to influence more frankly the
order they impose on the site. But whatever their differences
of language, priorities, images, styles, and precedents, they are
likely to find themselves, like Quist, in a situation of complexity
and uncertainty which demands the imposition of an order.
From whatever sources they draw such an initial discipline,
they will treat its imposition on the site as a global experiment
whose results will be only dimly apparent in the early stages
of the process. They will need to discover its consequences and
implications. And though they may differ from Quist in their
way of appreciating these, they will, like him, engage in a con­
versation with the situation they are shaping. Although their
repertoire of meanings may be different from Quist’s, they are
likely to find new and unexpected meanings in the changes
they produce and to redirect their moves in response to such
discoveries. And if they are good designers, they will reflect-inaction on the situation’s back-talk, shifting stance as they do
so from “ what if?” to recognition of implications, from involve­
ment in the unit to consideration of the total, and from explo­
ration to commitment.

103

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

This underlying process might emerge with greater clarity
if Quist’s demonstration were not so masterful. In his unfailing
virtuosity, he gives no hint of detecting and correcting errors
in his own performance. He zeroes in immediately on funda­
mental schemes and decisions which quickly acquire the status
of commitments. He compresses and perhaps masks the pro­
cess by which designers learn from iterations of moves which
lead them to reappreciate, reinvent, and redraw. But this may
be because he has developed a very good understanding of and
feeling for what he calls “ the problem of this problem.” If he
can zero in so quickly on a choice of initial geometry which
he knows how to make work with the screwy slope, it is perhaps
because he has seen and tried many approaches to situations
like this one. Like a chess master who develops a feeling for
the constraints and potentials of certain configurations of
pieces on the board, Quist seems to have developed a feeling
for the kind of conversation which this design situation sets
in motion. He does not need to play out all of the trees of
moves which might follow from his initial reframing of the
problem. It is this which permits him so confidently at the out­
set to describe the site as screwy and to dismiss it as a starting
point for design coherence. From this source, perhaps, comes
the confidence, the directness, and the simplicity of his demon­
stration. But Quist reflects very little on his own reflection-in­
action, and it would be easy for a student or observer to miss
the fundamental structure of inquiry which underlies his virtu­
oso performance.

104

4
Psychotherapy:
The Patient as
a Universe of One

The Context of Psychotherapeutic Practice
A t the turn of the century, psychiatry held a rather obscure
and tenuous position among the medical specialties. Psychia­
trists concerned themselves for the most part with the treat­
ment of the insane. They had little to do with the psychological
troubles of ordinary people, who might turn in their distress
to religion, to the popular philosophy of moral uplift, or to a
variety of sects and cults of the mind. Psychiatry made a very
faint claim to a basis in scientific knowledge.
By the end of W orld W ar II, however, psychiatry had be-

105

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

come a powerful force in American society, had extended its
reach beyond the asylum and had made serious inroads into
provinces that once belonged to religion or popular philosophy.
Indeed, psychiatry itself had become a new popular philoso­
phy, at least for the affluent middle classes— so much that Dr.
Norman Zinberg, writing in the Daedalus volume on the pro­
fessions in the early 1960s, could complain that psychiatry’s
popular appeal had created excessive expectations for it and
made the psychiatrist an object of suspicion to his medical col­
leagues.1
Although this transformation had been due in no small mea­
sure to the phenomenal rise in American life of one kind of
psychiatry, psychoanalysis, the whole field had become, in Leston Havens’s term, a babble of many voices. At first, psychia­
trists who identified themselves with medicine sought to pro­
tect themselves against the incursions of non-physicians such
as clinical psychologists. After World W ar II, however, the
field spilled over the boundaries of medicine and a plethora
of psychotherapies began to make their claims. W ithin psychi­
atry proper, Havens has described four main schools: objectivedescriptive psychiatry, psychoanalysis, interpersonal psychia­
try, and existential psychiatry.2 In the larger therapeutic uni­
verse, there are also various sorts of group therapy, family
therapy, operant conditioning, Rogerian therapy, Gestalt ther­
apy, short-term therapy, and transactional analysis, to name
only a few of the more prominent voices.
The fragmentation of the field provoked several kinds of re­
sponse. Psychoanalysts tried to preserve their special status.
Psychiatrists who wanted to keep close to medical science were
attracted by advances in psychopharmacology. Representatives
of different schools of therapy debated and competed more or
less openly with one another. Some professional schools chose

106

Psychotherapy: The Patient as a Universe of One
to specialize in a particular approach to therapy, while others
offered a supermarket of approaches among which students
were expected to choose.
A t the same time, there were important changes under way
in the larger societal context of therapeutic practice. Mental
hospitals came under severe public criticism as “ snakepits” and
“ dumping grounds,” and sociologists offered damaging ac­
counts of the techniques of labelling and social control by
which psychiatrists fostered the social role of the mentally ill.
These critical trends provided ammunition for the Mental
Health Act of 1964, which set out a legislative basis for depopu­
lating mental hospitals and de-institutionalizing the care of the
mentally ill. Many community mental health centers alligned
themselves with the growing interest in preventive services. In
the full flush of the 1960s, some psychiatrists openly turned
against their profession and devoted themselves to community
organization.
In the period between 1965 and 1981, the questioning of
therapeutic effectiveness has taken legislative form. Congress
has demanded proof of effectiveness as a condition for thirdparty payments to practitioners. The de-institutionalization of
the mental hospitals has continued, spurred on by public con­
cerns over the cost of hospital care. Psychoanalysis appears to
have lost some of its hold on the field, as clinical psychology
has become stronger and new professionals, such as social work­
ers, have moved into therapeutic roles. T he babble of contend­
ing schools of therapy continues, apparently without damage
to popular acceptance of psychotherapy, which has grown from
a treatment for the seriously ill or a luxury for the well-to-do,
to more or less standard fare for people in all walks of life.
Among the representatives of the competing schools of ther­
apy, many continue to defend their exclusive claims and leave

107

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

to the student or the client the difficult task of choosing among
them. But there have been other approaches to the predica­
ment posed by therapeutic pluralism. Havens has tried to de­
scribe what therapists of various schools actually do, by treating
the schools as sources of therapeutic techniques appropriate
to different sorts of patients and problems. Other writers have
tried to describe fundamental processes of inquiry shared by
therapists of various schools. Some practitioners, for example,
share a disposition to regard the patient as a unique case— in
Erik Erikson’s words, “ a universe of one.” These practitioners,
however much they may differ from one another in language
and technique, share an approach to therapy that distinguishes
them from those who regard patients as examples of standard
diagnostic categories. The practitioners of the unique case are
of special interest from the point of view of the study of reflection-in-action.
In the following pages, I will describe and analyze an interac­
tion between a psychiatric resident and his supervisor. I have
again selected an incident from professional education where
a practitioner’s reflection-in-action is more likely to be made
public than it is in ordinary practice. I have chosen a practi­
tioner who takes a psychoanalytical point of view, while rec­
ognizing that a protocol drawn from the work of Carl Rogers,
Fritz Peris, or Salvador Minuchin might have produced a
very different set of materials for analysis. It seems to me,
nevertheless, that therapists, who are in other respects very
different from one another must still frame the problem of
the particular patient, construct and test interpretations of
his behavior, and design interventions aimed at helping him.
The supervisor, in the case that follows, goes about his busi­
ness in a manner peculiar to his underlying model of therapy,
but the generality of his tasks links his inquiry to other thera­
pies of the unique case.

108

Psychotherapy: The Patient as a Universe of One

The Supervisory Session
The therapist is a third-year resident in psychiatry. His cur­
rent supervisor, a psychoanalyst, is one of some sixty supervi­
sors with whom he has met in the course of his three-year
training program. The resident sees his current supervisor for
one half-hour every week, averaging one supervisory session
for every seven or eight sessions with the patient. Because the
resident has been troubled by his relations with this supervi­
sor, he has agreed to tape-record the session and then to dis­
cuss the resulting protocol,3 hoping to learn from reflection
on the record of the meeting.
He begins by informing the supervisor that his patient, a
young woman, has returned to therapy after a hiatus of several
months.
r:

She had decided that she wasn't getting anywhere in therapy,
and I agreed somewhat that the same issues were coming up
again and again— and primarily that issue of her getting stuck
in the relationship with the man she had been seeing four
or five years at that time, and advances on her part were
matched by his withdrawal, and vice versa.

The Supervisor asks,
In what way did she get stuck with you, I mean, in terms of the
same way she got stuck in the relationship?
r:
W ell, she tended to feel that any insights led to very little
change, and we both noticed that even though she saw the
pattern of her relationship outside of the therapy, it didn't
do much good in her life . . . and it was difficult for her to
really get emotionally involved in the therapy itself, that she
was . . . quite guarded about talking about her past sadnesses
and disappointments about them.

iog

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

The Supervisor asks whether that was also a problem in her
relationship with her boyfriend.
r:

Yes, she tended to restrict the feelings that she had in that
relationship, especially the affectionate o n e s. . . and the sad
ones.

Summarizing, the Supervisor observes,
So here she rather quickly brings into the relationship that she's
having difficulty and can't express her feelings. . . she's stuck, that
she feels somewhat— maybe lowered self-esteem because she's
stuck.

Then he asks,
Did you at any time tell her that it's not surprising that what she
experienced in her other relationships is experienced with you, and
that here you have the advantage of looking at how she gets stuck
and trying to work it out together . . . ?

The Resident answers with a rather perfunctory affirmative:
Yeah, that was part of the work . . .

He goes on to describe the conditions of his patient's re-entry
into therapy, the negotiation of fees and times of appoint­
ments, and begins to reflect on these early sessions:
[What] has remained really paramount in her mind is wanting
something, someone to rely on . . . sort of a constant object. Maybe
in a way I've sort of served as that just by being available. She,
during the first several sessions, repeated a lot of the pattern in
the therapy that she had originally come in with in terms of feeling
. . . very stuck . . .
s:
(interrupts) W hat does she mean when she says stuck?
W hat's your experience?

HO

Psychotherapy: The Patient as a Universe of One
This question stimulates the Resident to produce a long exam­
ple, which the Supervisor probes with further questions.
r:

s:
r:

s:
r:

s:
r:

s:

r:

W ell . . . there's very much a pattern of her coming in and
telling me about a fight she has had . . . often around some
kind of misunderstanding. For instance, about the third ses­
sion, she was saying that they went up to their old haunt
. . . During the visit up there, he asked her whether or not
a certain woman had called her. And this woman was a mu­
tual friend, mostly a friend of his . . . And the patient thought
that this woman had been spending some time with her boy
friend. In fact, she knew that they had been together . . .
(interrupts) W hat do you mean, “ been together"?
That they had just visited together . . . She had some suspi­
cions. . . . And she said that they fought the rest of the time,
mainly over the suspicions she had. W hich has been one of
their themes. That he goes out with other women and that
she can't stand that. And he's not willing to stop. And she's
not willing to lay down what she will and will not accept.
And so she feels hurt and angry and suspicious when he's with
any other woman. Meanwhile, he doesn't like it at all when
she goes out with other men.
Does she go out with other men?
She doesn't, no . . . but that particular night, they fought
the whole night. He took her to a restaurant and she said,
“ He knows I don't like lobster." He ordered her meal, which
was lobster.
W hat do you mean, he ordered her meal? You mean she was
sitting there and doesn't say anything?
Yeah, I mean he takes control in many situations,
Did you ask her, I mean, how does that happen? If you don't
like lobster, did you manage while sitting at the table to order
something else yourself?
W ell, in the past, she said that if she argues with him, there'll
be a fight. And it is very painful. Either she has to go along
with him . . . and there isn't a fight. Or she argues and objects,
and there is a fight. And she feels she loses either way. If
there's a fight, she invariably loses the fight.
Ill

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION
s:
r:

How does she lose the fight?
W ell, it seems that mostly it's because she feels terrible when
the fight's over. That he attacks her in the fight with many
ways he thinks she is inadequate . . . She feels worse. And
then the other part of it is she's not willing to risk a total
severing of the relationship. There have been a number of
times now, when she's told him she'll never call him again.
And she doesn't want him to call her. And usually after a
month, she'll relent . . .

The Supervisor asks then,
W ell, what's your understanding of why it's this way? Do you have
some sense of what the conflicts are?

The Resident responds with new anecdotes, but the Supervisor
continues to press for an explanation.
s:

r:

s:
r:

s:
r:

s:
r:

112

You know, I don't get a sense of what you feel from seeing
her. How would you characterize her problems in your own
mind, psychodynamically? . . . W e don't know a lot about
her, but what does the material suggest?
W ell, at this point there are a couple of suspicions,
All right, hypotheses.
One is that she has a lot of trouble getting emotionally in­
volved, especially with men . . .
W hat's it do to her?
I can only suspect that she's very fearful of what it's going
to mean in terms of her own autonomy, in terms of her own
ability to make decisions and choices. And in terms of her
identity. W hen she gets very close, in this particular relation­
ship especially, she loses a sense of herself. She has to define
herself by the other person.
W hy does she do that? Do you think because she has some
basic problems with who's who? Or is it at some other level?
W ell, I think she has enough ego capacity that when she's
not deeply involved, that she does have a sense of herself
. . . But when she gets very close and very dependent on some­

Psychotherapy: The Patient as a Universe of One
one, which is her longing very much, the boundaries break
down . . .

The Supervisor now offers a hypothesis of his own:
s:

You may be right . . . you know her better than I do, we'd
have to wait and see. M y own sense of it is that she's very
disturbed at her own aggression. That she can't assert herself.
And yet she can't even mail a letter for herself. You know,
she becomes dependent, and when you say, “ W ell, why do
you do it that way . . . end up eating lobster when you don't
like it?" she says, “ W ell, what can I do?" And then she says
“ If it leads to an argument, then I feel very guilty." And she's
guilty, and part of her guilt is accepting as reality all of the
criticisms that her boyfriend levels at her . . .

He urges the Resident to use this hypothesis in the therapy:
I would try to get her curious about it. Say, “ Look, you seem able
to assert yourself and you get what you want [which the Resident,
trying to qualify the Supervisor's hypothesis, had just argued was
the case in the patient's school and work] but in this particular
area you do seem to be stunted." But I think that her fear of being
aggressive and asserting herself is at least in part based on her fear
of separation which is . . . that she's going to be l e f t . . . and that
she can't somehow take care of herself.

The Resident plunges at this point into new material drawn
from the patient’s history: her relationship with an alcoholic
father, her anger at her mother for driving the father away,
her recognition that her present relationship is very similar to
the relationship with her father, her early marriage which was
“ subordinate, in a way, but unexciting." This leads him to a
new interpretation:
r:

This is the other theme, that she feels a little dead. She feels
lifeless, without conflict. Something has to be going on out
there between her and someone else in a conflictual way.

^3

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION
s:

Yeah, I'm n o t . . . It may be that she feels dead. I don't know
yet . . .

The Supervisor refrains from joining the Resident's excursion
into the patient's history and avoids committing himself to the
new hypothesis. Instead, he returns to the present story of the
patient's relationship with her boyfriend (illuminated, perhaps,
by comparison with her "unexciting" marriage), and offers a
new interpretation of his own:
The man who's nice doesn't interest her. In order for the man
to be exciting, they have to be a bit of a bastard.

This leads the Resident to speculate that indeed the patient
may have left therapy the first time because he was "too much
of a nice guy." W hen she wanted to return, he had become
more "hardnosed," demanding that she pay more money—
perhaps, as the Supervisor then says, "becoming the bastard
who she likes and expects you to be,"
or that you might turn into him sometimes, or that you might be
struggling and ineffective. And I would look for signs of one or
the other developing in the relationship. But you see, you have
to ask yourself, “ Is this all a way in which she can't be satisfied
because she feels so guilty about it?"

The Supervisor then returns to his earlier line of thought:
She constantly keeps herself frustrated . . . well, anyone who con­
stantly keeps themselves frustrated, you have to wonder whether
they are in love with frustration in some way . . . or that because
they're guilty about getting something for themselves that they
have to constantly put roadblocks in the way. I don't know if the
two are mutually exclusive but I think she's someone who really

114

Psychotherapy: The Patient as a Universe of One
r:

s:
r:

s:
r:

I think they go together somewhat,
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I mean, if she feels guilty, she wants punishment,
Yeah.
Not only does she not want pleasure.

The Supervisor opens up a new line of inquiry.
s:

W hat does she want punishment for? For her agressive angry
thoughts, her sexual wishes? You'd have to look and see
whether these arguments interfere with their sexual life

r:

A t times they stimulate it, too.
I see.
A t times, they both get mutually stimulated,
If she is punished, then she can enjoy, or if she enjoys, then
she needs to be punished, or something. I would see this as
a woman who really feels quite guilty.
Um.
About what, we have to decide . . . and really has without
knowing it constantly thwarted her ability to be satisfied, and
that's where she's stuck.

s:
r:

s:

r:

s:

The Resident offers a proposal:
I posit her guilt might be her identification with her mother. She's
angry at her mother for driving her father away. How much does
she feel that she's responsible?

But the Supervisor cautions against leaping beyond the evi­
dence:
Yeah, well, we don't know . . . It's too early to know all of these
things.

and he suggests that they now review the patient's history:

JJ5

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

Well, it might be helpful at this point to go over the history, to
get some sense of the context.
As the Resident continues to speculate on the patient's feel­
ings of guilt, the Supervisor counters,
I think if we can get some sense of this woman's frustration, and
of the way in which she continues to frustrate herself . . .
And in his parting comment, he redirects the Resident's atten­
tion to his relationship with the patient:
r:

s:

She made a comment something like, “ Is that the theory
now?"
Yet, yeah . . . she will find ways of distancing you, just like
she does her boyfriend.

Therapeutic Knowledge-in-Practice
Erik Erikson has described the psychotherapist's task as one
of listening to the patient's complaint, eliciting its history, and
making, testing, and delivering interpretations of the patient's
data. The main questions of therapy have to do with the reli­
ability of interpretation:
In what way can the psychological clinician make his own percep­
tions and thought reliable, in the face of the patient's purely verbal
and social expression, and in the absence of non-verbal supportive
instruments?4
For Erikson, this is not a matter of objective knowledge but
of “ disciplined subjectivity."5 It derives from a reciprocal obli­
gation in which the patient must verbalize everything and the

116

Psychotherapy: The Patient as a Universe of One
analyst, in order to discover the patient’s unconscious and re­
frain from imposing unconscious assumptions of his own, must
listen in a special way, waiting for the gradual emergence of
the themes which signal the patient’s message. The material
ought not to be subsumed under existing categories. The pa­
tient is “ a ‘series of one’ who must be understood in terms of
the unique experiences of his life.” 6 The analyst must “ set
aside all preconceptions, listening afresh and testing the expla­
nations as they arise.” 7
Emergent interpretations are to be tested first for their plau­
sibility and then for their utility in intervention. Erikson ob­
serves that the clinician
has no right to test his reconstructions until his trial formulations
have combined into a comprehensive interpretation which feels
right to him, and which promises, when appropriately verbalized,
to feel right to the patient.8

Then, and only then,
the clinician usually finds himself compelled to speak, in order to
help the patient in verbalizing his affects and images in a more
communicative manner, and to communicate his own impres­
sions.9

The correctness of an interpretation does not always lie in the
patient’s “ immediate assent,” but rather
in the way in which the communication between patient and thera­
pist “ keeps moving,” leading to new and surprising insights and to
the patient’s greater assumption of responsibility for himself.10

In the testing of interpretations and, indeed, in the entire in­
terpretive inquiry, Erikson gives a special place to the phenom­

117

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

enon of transference. The patient has “ an interest in repeating
the past in the present” which leads him to transfer “ messages
from other life situations” to the therapeutic one.11 This inter­
est may prevent the patient from cooperating with the associa­
tive procedure. The analyst’s interpretation may free the pa­
tient to cooperate, but only if the analyst detects and interprets
the countertransferences which would prevent him from listen­
ing in the recommended way. W hat is most important about
the transference is that through it, the patient brings into ther­
apy meanings, unconscious motivations, and strategies of be­
havior which can be surfaced and examined, harnessing to the
work of therapeutic inquiry his interest in repeating the past
in the present.
In the protocol we have examined, the Supervisor lives out
the main lines of Erikson’s description of therapeutic practice.
As he listens to the Resident’s reconstruction of his patient’s
material, he builds and tests interpretations. Because he en­
counters the patient only through the Resident’s stories, he
does not exhibit the analyst’s special way of listening nor enter
into the reciprocal obligation with the patient. But he advises
the Resident how to do these things and, especially, how to
make use of the phenomenon of the transference.
A t the very beginning of the session, when the Resident
describes his patient as stuck in her relationship with her
boyfriend and “ getting nowhere in therapy,” the Supervisor
asks,
In what way did she get stuck with you, I mean, in terms of the
same way she got stuck in the relationship?

W ith this slight change in the question, the Supervisor restruc­
tures the puzzle. Centering attention on the connection be-

ll8

Psychotherapy: The Patient as a Universe of One
tween “ stuck in the relationship” and “ stuck with you,” he an­
chors the inquiry in the patient’s transference, where the rela­
tionship between patient and therapist can serve as a window
on the patient’s life outside therapy. So restructured, the ques­
tion lends itself to a method of investigation which the Supervi­
sor knows how to pursue. It motivates and guides his further
questioning and inference.
Accordingly, he turns immediately to the Resident’s experi­
ence of what the patient means when she says she is stuck. He
intends to elicit data about the patient’s meanings, and these
are forthcoming. But he does not listen passively to the Resi­
dent’s reports of his patient’s stories. He probes them actively.
Following the story of the patient’s fight with her boyfriend,
for example, he asks, “ W hat do you mean, ‘been together’?”
“ Does she go out with other men?” “ W hat do you mean, he
ordered her meal?” “ How does she lose the fight?” These ques­
tions suggest an origin in the Supervisor’s image of the sorts
of stories which would throw light on the way in which the
patient is stuck. The incident of the boyfriend ordering the
patient’s meal contributes to an emerging picture of the pa­
tient’s passivity and dependence. The Supervisor’s “ How
come?” leads the Resident to describe the patient’s dilemma:
she feels she loses whether she goes along with her boyfriend’s
demands or resists them. The Supervisor’s “ How does she lose
the fight?” induces the Resident to describe the patient’s fears
of feeling terrible after such fights, her anxiety, that she will
be abandoned, her feelings of inadequacy about herself.
Such questions suggest a repertoire of meanings and psycho­
dynamic patterns accessible to the Supervisor, but apparently
not to the Resident. The Supervisor uses his repertoire to pur­
sue the development of stories until he finds them ready for
interpretation. W hen they reach this stage of development,

n9

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

he stops probing and shifts, rather abruptly, to a search for ex­
planations:
W ell, what’s your understanding of why it’s this way? Do you have
some sense of what the conflicts are?

W ith this, he not only asks for an explanation but indicates
the domain in which to look for it. The story of the patient’s
fight with her boyfriend has revealed a dilemma rooted in con­
flicts the patient cannot resolve.
W hen the Resident responds by telling more stories about
the patient’s earlier life, the Supervisor brings him back to the
search for interpretation:
You know, I don’t get a sense of what you feel from seeing her.
How would you characterize her problems in your own mind, psychodynamically?

Now the Resident attempts an explanation, an account of the
patient’s trouble in getting emotionally involved, “ especially
with men.” This the Supervisor brushes aside. He has an expla­
nation of his own:
M y own sense of it is that she’s very disturbed at her own aggres­
sion. That she can’t assert herself.

As he develops this alternative, the Supervisor demonstrates
a particular way of drawing interpretations from the data of
the stories:
And yet she can’t even mail a letter for herself. You know, she
becomes dependent, and when you say, “ W ell, why do you do it
that way, end up eating lobster when you don’t even like it?” she
says, “ W ell, what can I do?” And then she says, “ If it leads to
an argument, then I feel very guilty.” And she’s guilty, and part
12 0

Psychotherapy: The Patient as a Universe of One
of her guilt is accepting as reality all of the criticisms that her boy­
friend levels at her.

This passage moves gradually through a chain of inferences.
From the fact that the patient allows her boyfriend to mail
her letters and order her meals, it follows that she is unable
to assert herself. She becomes dependent. Given her depen­
dence, an argument with her boyfriend causes her to feel
guilty. (The Resident's “ feeling terrible" has become “ feeling
guilty.")
The Supervisor has now linked her dependency to her feel­
ings of inadequacy and guilt, and these, to her tendency to ac­
cept all of her boyfriend's criticisms as reality. In this con­
densed explanation, the Supervisor pulls scattered bits of
information together, grounding each partial interpretation in
a piece of evidence drawn from the Resident's account of his
patient's stories. In contrast, the Resident leaps to such inter­
pretations as “ the shaky boundaries of the self," “ the feeling
of deadness," and the “ feeling of responsibility for the father's
leaving," without basing them on the patient's material and
without the benefit of a careful progression of questioning and
testing. T o each of the Resident's interpretive leaps, the Super­
visor responds, “ I don't know y e t . . . we have to wait and see."
The Supervisor's gradual construction of an interpretation
proceeds with his observation that “ the man who's nice doesn't
interest her." This leads to “ for the man to be exciting, they
have to be a bit of a bastard," and then to “ she constantly keeps
herself frustrated." But constant self-frustration demands an
explanation. The Supervisor suggests two alternatives:
well, anyone who constantly keeps herself frustrated, you have to
wonder whether they are in love with frustration in some way
. . . or that because they're guilty about getting something for
12 1

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION
themselves that they have to constantly put roadblocks in the
way.

Both of these explanations can go together, says the Resident,
and the Supervisor agrees. "If she feels guilty, she wants pun­
ishment/' Guilt can lead her to seek punishment which she
then finds gratifying. But punishment for what? Again there
are two possibilities, "agressive, angry thoughts" or "sexual
wishes." In order to decide between these alternatives, the Su­
pervisor conducts an experiment. He asks whether the punish­
ing fights interfere with the patient's sex life with her boy­
friend. On being informed that they sometimes stimulate it,
he infers that punishment responds to sexual wishes, and he
offers a new synthesis:
If she is punished, then she can enjoy, or if she enjoys, then she
needs to be punished, or something. I would see this as a woman
who really feels quite guilty . . . about what, we have to decide
. . . and really has without knowing it constantly thwarted her abil­
ity to be satisfied, and that's where she's stuck.

The repeated "really" suggests a coming-to-rest, as though the
Supervisor were now satisfied that his initial question has been
answered. He has constructed an interpretation which explains
how she is stuck in the relationship with her boyfriend, and
he proceeds to show how this interpretation also explains how
she is stuck in therapy. He does this by inviting the Resident
to reflect on the ways in which he finds himself becoming the
person his patient wants and needs him to be:
You begin to review being the bastard who she likes and expects
you to be, in her own view, to struggle with and to be excited by,
but not to be satisfied by . . . or that you might turn into him some­
times, or that you might be struggling and ineffective. And I would
12 2

Psychotherapy: The Patient as a Universe of One
look for signs of one or the other developing in the relationship.
But you see, you have to ask yourself, “ Is this all a way in which
she can't be satisfied because she feels so guilty about it?"

This interpretation, which connects the two senses in which
the patient is stuck, also suggests a strategy of intervention.
The Resident should observe how he is being drawn into the
patient's transference. Rather than colluding in his process, he
should suggest to her
that what she experiences in her relationships is experienced with
you, and that here you have the advantage of looking at how she
gets stuck and trying to work it out together.

The Resident should get the patient interested in the puzzle
of her self-frustration:
I would try to get her curious about it. Say, “ Look, you seem able
to assert yourself and get what you want, but in this particular area
you do seem to be stunted."

These interventions would test the utility of the interpretation
whose plausibility the Supervisor has established through a
chain of interpretive inference. It would do so by involving the
patient in an inquiry similar to the one the Supervisor and Resi­
dent have just undertaken. The new interpretation will be af­
firmed if the patient finds it compelling. But the hypothesis
testing is also a therapeutic intervention. As therapist and pa­
tient “ look at how she gets stuck and try to work it out togeth­
er," they will discover how she has recreated in therapy the
most troubling features of her life outside of therapy.
In spite of his suggested strategy of intervention, the Super­
visor holds his interpretation loosely. W hen the Resident leaps
to an explanation of the patient's guilt, the Supervisor cautions,

123

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

“ W ell, we don't know yet. It's too early to know all of these
things." Instead, he returns to the general observation with
which his earlier chain of inference began:
I think if we can get some sense of this woman's frustration, and
of the way in which she continues to frustrate herself . . .

Having constructed and tested a solution to the puzzle, the
Supervisor means to keep it open to further inquiry. The Resi­
dent should use the tentative solution to guide his work with
the patient, but he should keep the puzzle alive.
Throughout the entire dialogue with the Resident, the Su­
pervisor has been demonstrating a reflective conversation with
the patient's material. He has reframed the problem of the pa­
tient in such a way as to locate it squarely in the transference:
the puzzle is to explain how the patient is stuck in the therapy
as she is stuck in her relationship with her boyfriend. In the
subsequent puzzle solving, two streams of data must be inte­
grated. A sense must be found which links the patient's stories
of her life experience with the Resident's experience of the pa­
tient in therapy. The two kinds of data are accumulated gradu­
ally and the Supervisor probes and develops them until the pre­
cipitate of an interpretation seems ready to form. The
interpretive process proceeds step by step. Beginning with gen­
eralized observations only one step removed from the language
of the stories, the Supervisor builds a chain of inferences in
which each link is grounded in themes drawn from the pa­
tient's experience. He joins these together in an explanation
which connects the patient's recurrent dilemma to a general­
ized account of inner conflicts. This explanation leads the Su­
pervisor to a further question (punishment for what?) which
generates alternative hypotheses. In order to discriminate be­
tween these, he conducts a crucial experiment in the form of

124

Psychotherapy: The Patient as a Universe of One
a question. W ith the answer in hand, he proposes an interpre­
tive synthesis which explains the material of the patient's sto­
ries, and he extends it to account for the patient's continual
self-frustration in therapy. A t this point, when he has given
a plausible account of the two ways in which the patient is
stuck, he proposes an intervention designed to test his account.
T he Resident should try to get the patient interested in her
continual self-frustration, engaging her in a conscious use of
the transference to gain insight into her life outside of therapy.
W hat does the Resident make of this demonstration? After
listening to the tape recording of this session, he complains
that the Supervisor was not telling him what he wanted to hear.
Then, upon reflection, he adds that he was not asking for what
he wanted to know. He doubts that the Supervisor is an effec­
tive role model for him. He wants more help than he is getting,
but feels angry when he asks for it. He senses that the Supervi­
sor has formed a negative judgment about him which has never
been expressed, and he seeks to explain his troubles with the
Supervisor in terms of conflicting approaches to psychothera­
py: “ He is more psychoanalytic, while I deal more with con­
scious phenomena.” Yet he displays in the protocol an eager­
ness to join, indeed, to compete with, the Supervisor’s
psychoanalytic inquiry.
It is clear, both from the protocol and from private inter­
views, that the Resident discerns in the Supervisor’s perfor­
mance a knowing-in-practice that he values, but he is frustrated
in his attempts to grasp it. W hat eludes him is the system of
understandings which lies behind the Supervisor’s inquiry.
W hen the Supervisor demonstrates what he takes as a story
sufficient for interpretation, when he focuses on certain details
while leaving others in the background, he appears to be guided
by a repertoire of story types, interpretive explanations, and
psychodynamic patterns. He uses these but does not describe

125

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

them. He does not try to tell the Resident what leads him to
select certain details for attention or to accept a story as ade­
quate for interpretation. Similarly, he does not say why he
brushes aside the Resident’s proferred interpretations, why he
says repeatedly, “ we don’t know enough, we’d have to wait and
see . . . ” He does not reveal the thoughts and feelings which
guide him in his shifts from one phase of inquiry to the next.
He reflects-in-action but he does not reflect on his reflectionin-action.
The Resident does not know whether the Supervisor would
be unwilling, or perhaps unable, to make more of his knowingin-practice explicit. T he Resident has not asked for this, and
the Supervisor has not offered it. As the Resident says, rather
wistfully,
I am not explicit about what 1want from the Supervisor and he
is not explicit about what he gives, and so it just happens.

Nor has the Supervisor tried to discover what the Resident
makes of his demonstration. His approach to instruction con­
sists in demonstrating and advocating a kind of therapeutic re­
flection-in-action, but it is also an approach of mystery and
mastery.12 He demonstrates his mastery of the material, but
he keeps the sources of his performance mysterious.
The Resident has a complementary approach to learning.
It is one of mystery and passivity. He witholds his feelings of
dissatisfaction and frustration, and he follows the Supervisor’s
lead, seeking to join in interpretive moves whose sources re­
main mysterious to him. He does not question the hidden
sources of the Supervisor’s performance, and he does not ask
for what he wants to learn.
It is very striking that the two therapists do not make their
own interaction into an object of mutual reflection. In one of

126

Psychotherapy: The Patient as a Universe of One
his interviews, the Resident discovers this point. Excitedly, he
shows how his relationship with the Supervisor resembles the
patient’s relationship to her therapist, especially in the matter
of control and cooperation. Like his patient, the Resident feels
stuck in his relationship to the person who is supposed to help
him, wanting more from him than he feels he is getting, yet
angry at himself for wanting more. But these issues do not
come up for discussion in the clinical supervision itself. Had
they done so, the boundaries of reflection might have been
stretched to include the meaning of the Supervisor’s demon­
stration, the Supervisor might have begun to reflect on his own
reflection-in-action, and the Resident might have begun to
gain access to the mysterious sources of the Supervisor’s perfor­
mance.

127

£
The Structure of
Reflection- in-Action

Introduction
In the two previous chapters, I have discussed examples of
practice in two professions usually considered very different
from one another.
The differences between architecture and psychotherapy are
so very striking that at first glance there seems to be very little
point in searching for resemblances. T o begin with, the goals
of the two professions have almost nothing to do with one an­
other. The one aims at designing good buildings on a site; the
other, at curing mental illness or helping people to cope with
the problems they encounter in their lives. One uses the media
of sketchpad, delineations, scale models; the other, talk. The
architect works in his studio; the therapist, in a clinic or office.
And the two professions draw on very different bodies of pro­
fessional knowledge.

128

The Structure of Reflection-in-Action
But in the two cases there are also similarities. T o be sure,
these are partly a function of my methods of selection and
study, but they are also, in part, a function of the practices
themselves.
In both examples, the practitioner approaches the practice
problem as a unique case. He does not act as though he had
no relevant prior experiences; on the contrary. But he attends
to the peculiarities of the situation at hand. Quist pays atten­
tion to the special problem of this screwy site and the Supervi­
sor, to the special problem of this frustrated patient. Neither
one behaves as though he were looking for cues to a standard
solution. Rather, each seeks to discover the particular features
of his problematic situation, and from their gradual discovery,
designs an intervention.
In neither example is the problem given. Or rather, the stu­
dent presents a problem that the teacher criticizes and rejects.
The student has gotten stuck and does not know how to go
further. The teacher, who attributes the student’s predicament
to his way of framing the problem, tries to make new sense
of the problematic situation he is encountering at secondhand.
The situation is complex and uncertain, and there is a problem
in finding the problem.
These points of similarity create the conditions for reflec­
tion-in-action. Because each practitioner treats his case as
unique, he cannot deal with it by applying standard theories
or techniques. In the half hour or so that he spends with the
student, he must construct an understanding of the situation
as he finds it. And because he finds the situation problematic,
he must reframe it.
The cases are similar in the further sense that in both archi­
tecture and psychiatry there are many competing views of the
nature of the practice. There is controversy not only about the
best way of solving specific problems, but about what problems

129

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

are worth solving and what role the practitioner should play
in their solution. I propose that by attending to the practition­
er's reflection-in-action in both cases it is possible to discover
a fundamental structure of professional inquiry which underlies
the many varieties of design or therapy advocated by the con­
tending schools of practice.
Finally, in each case the practitioner gives an artistic perfor­
mance. He responds to the complexity, which confuses the stu­
dent, in what seems like a simple, spontaneous way. His artistry
is evident in his selective management of large amounts of in­
formation, his ability to spin out long lines of invention and
inference, and his capacity to hold several ways of looking at
things at once without disrupting the flow of inquiry.
It is the art of these practitioners that I shall compare and
discuss in the following pages. Their art seems to me to be,
in considerable measure, a kind of reflection-in-action. In spite
of the very great differences between their two cases, Quist and
the Supervisor engage in a process whose underlying structure
is the same: a reflective conversation with a unique and uncer­
tain situation.
The main lines of this process can be readily drawn. Indeed,
they are not very far below the surface of the examples as I
have described them.
In each case, the student has set and tried to solve a problem
and has been unable to solve the problem as set. Petra cannot
butt the shapes of the building into the contours of the slope;
neither can the Resident unravel the puzzle of the patient by
analyzing her relationships with others. In each case the
teacher responds by surfacing and criticizing the student's
framing of the problem. He does this implicitly, leaving his
criticism of the old problem to be inferred from his way of re­
structuring it. Petra must infer that the site is incoherent and
cannot give an order to the design. The Resident must infer

130

The Structure of Reflection-in-Action
that he cannot make sense of the patient’s stalemated relation
to her boyfriend without looking at it in relation to her stale­
mate with himself.
As the practitioner reframes the student’s problem, he sug­
gests a direction for reshaping the situation. Petra is urged to
impose a geometry onto the slope, a geometry seen as gener­
ated by the L-shaped classrooms. The Resident is invited to
join the two streams of experience drawn from the patient’s
life in and out of therapy. The practitioner asks the student
to step into the situation, to make himself part of it— in Quist’s
case, by imposing his own order onto the site; in the Supervi­
sor’s, by treating his own relations with the patient as a micro­
cosm of the patient’s life outside of therapy.
T he practitioner then takes the reframed problem and con­
ducts an experiment to discover what consequences and impli­
cations can be made to follow from it. Quist’s global, frame­
testing experiment begins with “ You must impose a discipline”
and ends with “ which works slightly with the contours.” T he
Supervisor’s begins with “ How is she stuck . . . ?” and ends
with, “ This is really a woman who feels quite guilty . . . and
that’s how she’s stuck.”
In order to see what can be made to follow from his refram­
ing of the situation, each practitioner tries to adapt the situa­
tion to the frame. This he does through a web of moves, discov­
ered consequences, implications, appreciations, and further
moves. W ithin the larger web, individual moves yield phenom­
ena to be understood, problems to be solved, or opportunities
to be exploited. Quist discovers spaces that can be made into
nooks. The Supervisor finds a procedure for answering the
question, “ Punishment for what?” These are local experiments
nested within larger ones.
But the practitioner’s moves also produce unintended
changes which give the situations new meanings. T he situation

131

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

talks back, the practitioner listens, and as he appreciates what
he hears, he reframes the situation once again. W hen Quist
discovers that his moves have produced a gallery which is “ in
a minor way .. . the major thing/' he becomes aware of a new
whole idea, which sets criteria for the further designing. W hen
the Supervisor discerns in the patient's stories the pattern
which he describes as “ continual self-frustration," he sets a re­
structured problem of interpretation which guides his further
inquiry.
In this reflective conversation, the practitioner's effort to
solve the reframed problem yields new discoveries which call
for new reflection-in-action. The process spirals through stages
of appreciation, action, and reappreciation. The unique and
uncertain situation comes to be understood through the at­
tempt to change it, and changed through the attempt to under­
stand it.
Such is the skeleton of the process. It suggests several further
questions.
1.

2.

3.

132

The practitioner conducts an experiment in reframing the
problematic situation. But how is such an experiment to be
evaluated? The practitioner judges his problem-solving effec­
tiveness in terms of an objective function, but how ought he
to judge the problem setting which establishes the objective
function?
W hen the practitioner takes seriously the uniqueness of the
present situation, how does he make use of the experience he
has accumulated in his earlier practice? W hen he cannot
apply familiar categories of theory or technique, how does he
bring prior knowledge to bear on the invention of new frames,
theories, and strategies of action?
Reflection-in-action is a kind of experimenting. But practice
situations are notoriously resistant to controlled experiment.
How does the practitioner escape or compensate for the prac­

The Structure of Reflection-in-Action

4.

tical limits to controlled experiment? In what sense, if any,
is there rigor in on-the-spot experiment?
Technical problem solving involves a characteristic stance to­
ward inquiry, as suggested by terms such as objectivity, con­
trol, and distance. These terms have limited application to the
processes demonstrated by Quist and the Supervisor. Never­
theless, their stance toward inquiry is critical to the quality
of their reflection-in-action. How should we describe it?

Questions such as these point to a further elaboration of reflec­
tion-in-action as an epistemology of practice. One might try
to answer them by appeal to a structure of inquiry, but I do
not know what such a structure might be or how it might be
discovered, if not by reflection on the actual practice of experi­
enced, competent practitioners who reflect-in-action. Accord­
ingly, I shall approach these questions by looking for answers
to them implicit in Quist's designing and in the Supervisor's
interpretive inquiry.

Evaluating Experiments in Problem Setting
Quist and the Supervisor act as though they were judging their
reframing of the students' problems in terms of these ques­
tions:
Can I solve the problem I have set?
Do I like what I get when I solve this problem?
Have I made the situation coherent?
Have I made it congruent with my fundamental values and theo­
ries?
Have I kept inquiry moving?

m

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

Although a problem-setting experiment cannot be judged in
terms of its effectiveness, the practitioner tries nevertheless to
set a problem he can solve. If Quist and the Supervisor failed
to do this, they would be stuck as their students are stuck.
Hence they step into the situation with a framing of the prob­
lem for which they feel they can find a solution. Quist chooses
a geometry of parallels which can be made to work slightly with
the contours of the slope; at the same time, he sets a threshold
standard of fit which enables him to say that “ slightly” is
enough. The Supervisor frames the patient’s problem in terms
of the transference which lends itself both to a strategy of in­
quiry and a strategy of intervention. Neither practitioner can
know, at the moment of reframing, what the solution to the
problem will be, nor can he be sure that the new problem will
be soluble at all. But the frame he has imposed on the situation
is one that lends itself to a method of inquiry in which he has
confidence.
W hen the practitioner tries to solve the problem he has set,
he seeks both to understand the situation and to change it.
Quist’s moves test the new geometry’s suitability to the slope
and at the same time they carve the L-shaped classrooms into
the slope, producing a new configuration of buildings on the
site. The Supervisor, operating at one remove from the patient,
sees the therapeutic situation through the Resident’s reports.
As he elicits new stories and probes them, he tests his evolving
understanding and at the same time draws out new phenomena
which alter his experience of the situation.
T he practitioner's moves produce some unintended effects.
Quist discovers that as he carves the classrooms into the slope,
he makes intervals of five feet. He finds that the gallery can
be “ extended to look down into here” and that it contrasts with
the classrooms. The Supervisor’s line of questioning elicits the
surprising and puzzling story of the patient’s fight with her boy­

!34

The Structure of Reflection-in-Action
friend. T he practitioner evaluates his problem-setting experi­
ment by determining whether he likes these unintended
changes, or likes what he can make of them. Quist observes
that five feet is maximum height for a kid, so that the five-foot
intervals can be made into nooks. T he extension of the gallery
is “ nice” and makes a “ soft back area” to the hard-edged class­
rooms. T he Supervisor sees in the story of the fight the signs
of the patient’s passivity and dependence which he will pursue
in his further questioning.
In these instances, the practitioner affirms his reframing of
the problem, because he values the unintended changes he has
made and discovered. Quist values nooks, nice views, and a
softening of hard-edged forms. The Supervisor values selfassertion, independence, and the ability to free oneself from
dead ends; the story, which reveals the absence of these quali­
ties in the patient, gives him a direction in which to seek inter­
pretative understanding. The evaluation of the frame experi­
ment is grounded in the practitioner’s appreciative system.
Through the unintended effects of action, the situation talks
back. T he practitioner, reflecting on this back-talk, may find
new meanings in the situation which lead him to a new refram­
ing. Thus he judges a problem-setting by the quality and direc­
tion of the reflective conversation to which it leads. This judg­
ment rests, at least in part, on his perception of potentials for
coherence and congruence which he can realize through his
further inquiry.
Quist interweaves local experiments with one another, hon­
oring in each new experiment the implications generated by
earlier moves. He finds that the spaces created by carving the
L-shaped classrooms into the slope open out into “ precincts”
which must be given precedence. He observes that a middle
area has been created whose treatment must be consistent with
the overall geometry. By the time the new configuration has

135

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

been found to work slightly with the contours and the gallery
has emerged as the focus of the design, there is, at the level
of the global geometry of the buildings on the site, a whole
idea so powerful for Quist that he calls Petra’s placement of
the administration “ horrible” because it would spoil that idea.
T he Supervisor builds gradually from his perception of the
patient’s dilemma toward an interpretive synthesis congruent
with his fundamental values and theories. He reaches for par­
tial interpretations which stay close to the data of the thematic
stories he has elicited from the Resident. He guides his search
for explanations by reference to the psychoanalytic themes of
“ inner conflict” and “ guilt.” By the time he has fully surfaced
his interpretive synthesis, he has imbued it with the capacity
to account for the earlier, partial interpretations and has made
it congruent with psychoanalytic theory.
Thus the practitioner evaluates his experiment in reframing
the problematic situation not only by his ability to solve the
new problem he has set but by his appreciations of the unin­
tended effects of action, and especially by his ability, in conver­
sation with the situation, to make an artifact that is coherent
and an idea that is understandable. But the achievement of
coherence does not put an end to inquiry. On the contrary,
the practitioner also evaluates his reframing by its ability, in
Erikson’s phrase, to keep inquiry moving. Quist concludes his
review by describing new questions which flow from the de­
sign— the size of the middle area, the dimensions of the grid,
the treatment of the trees. And the Supervisor, fearful of pre­
mature closure, rounds off his interpretive journey with the ex­
hortation, “ If only we can get an idea of the way this woman
keeps herself frustrated. . . . ” A successful reframing of the
problematic situation leads to a continuation of the reflective
conversation.

136

The Structure of Reflection-in-Action

Bringing Past Experience to Bear on a Unique
Situation
Quist recognizes many familiar things in Petra’s situation, and
he places them within familiar, named categories such as “ par­
allels,” “ classrooms,” “ slope,” and “ wall.” Similarly, the Super­
visor recognizes and names examples of “ self-assertion,” “ de­
pendence,” and “ guilt.” But when it comes to the situation
as a whole, each practitioner does not subsume it under a famil­
iar category but treats it as a unique entity for which he must
invent a uniquely appropriate description.
The Supervisor’s initial description of the patient’s problem
opens up a line of inquiry into the unique experience of this
woman. He may have seen other patients who were continually
self-frustrating or guilty, but he does not diagnose this patient
as a case of guilt as a physician might diagnose someone as a
case of mumps or chicken pox. Rather, he attends to her partic­
ular way of being guilty and to the role guilt plays in her inabil­
ity to satisfy herself. The notions of guilt and self-frustration
guide his attempts to discover what is different about this pa­
tient’s experience.
Quist has very likely seen other screwy sites, but his initial
description of this one does not place it within a design cate­
gory that calls for a standard solution. Rather, it sets in motion
an inquiry into the peculiar features of these slopes which re­
spond in very special ways to the imposition of a geometry of
parallels, creating a particular set of problems and a particular
coherence.
It is in relation to the unique features of his problematic situ­
ation that each practitioner undertakes the problem-setting ex­
periment we have just discussed. But just this is puzzling. How

!37

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

can an inquirer use what he already knows in a situation which
he takes to be unique?
He cannot apply a rule drawn from past experience, like the
rule Quist gives for uses appropriate to slopes of various grades;
for he would then ignore the uniqueness of the situation, treat­
ing it as an instance of a class of familiar things. Nor does he
invent a new description out of whole cloth, without any refer­
ence to what he already knows. It is clear that Quist and the
Supervisor use a great deal of their experience and knowledge,
and it is far from clear what might be meant by the spontane­
ous generation of a description.
W hat I want to propose is this: The practitioner has built
up a repertoire of examples, images, understandings, and ac­
tions. Quist’s repertoire ranges across the design domains. It
includes sites he has seen, buildings he has known, design prob­
lems he has encountered, and solutions he has devised for
them. The Supervisor’s repertoire includes patients he has seen
or read about, types of stories he has heard and psychodynamic
patterns associated with them, interventions he has tried, and
patients’ responses to them. A practitioner’s repertoire includes
the whole of his experience insofar as it is accessible to him
for understanding and action.
W hen a practitioner makes sense of a situation he perceives
to be unique, he sees it as something already present in his
repertoire.1 T o see this site as that one is not to subsume the
first under a familiar category or rule. It is, rather, to see the
unfamiliar, unique situation as both similar to and different
from the familiar one, without at first being able to say similar
or different with respect to what. The familiar situation func­
tions as a precedent, or a metaphor, or— in Thomas Kuhn’s
phrase— an exemplar for the unfamiliar one.2 Kuhn’s descrip­
tion of the functioning of exemplars in scientific problem
solving is apposite here:

138

The Structure of Reflection-in-Action
confronted with a problem, [one] seeks to see it as like one or more
of the exemplary problems he has encountered before . . . his basic
criterion is a perception of similarity that is both logically and psy­
chologically prior to any of the numerous criteria by which that
same identification might have been made . . . Under appropriate
circumstance . . . there is a means of processing data into similarity
sets which does not depend on a prior answer to the question, simi­
lar with respect to what?3

Seeing this situation as that one, one may also do in this situa­
tion as in that one. W hen a beginning physics student sees
a pendulum problem as a familiar inclined plane problem, he
can set up the new problem and solve it, using procedures both
similar to and different from those he has used before. Just as
he sees the new problem as a variation on the old one, so his
new problem-solving behavior is a variation on the old. Just as
he is unable at first to articulate the relevant similarities and
differences of the problems, so he is unable at first to articulate
the similarities and differences of his problem-solving proce­
dures. Indeed, the whole process of seeing-as and doing-as may
proceed without conscious articulation.
On the other hand, the inquirer may reflect on the similari­
ties and differences he has perceived or enacted. He may do
this by consciously comparing the two situations, or by describ­
ing this situation in the light of a tacit reference to the other.
W hen Quist immediately calls Petra's site "screwy" and says
that she must impose a discipline on it, which she can always
break open later, I believe he is seeing her situation as one or
more others with which he is familiar and carrying over to her
problem variations of strategies he has employed before. And
when the Supervisor asks how the woman is stuck in her rela­
tion with her boyfriend as she is stuck in her relation to the
therapist, I believe he is doing very much the same sort of
thing. In both cases, the later descriptions of the situation are

*39

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

reflections on and elaborations of the first, unarticulated per­
ceptions of similarity and difference.
It would be a mistake to attribute to the inquirer at the be­
ginning of such a process the articulated description which he
achieves later on— to say, for example, that Quist must have
known unconsciously at the beginning just how this site is
screwy and just how the geometry of parallels can be success­
fully imposed on it. T o do so would be to engage in instant
historical revisionism. The perception of similarity and differ­
ence implicit in Quist’s initial description of the situation is,
as Kuhn says, both logically and psychologically prior to his
later articulation of it.
It is our capacity to see unfamiliar situations as familiar ones,
and to do in the former as we have done in the latter, that en­
ables us to bring our past experience to bear on the unique case.
It is our capacity to see-as and do-as that allows us to have
a feel for problems that do not fit existing rules.
The artistry of a practitioner like Quist hinges on the range
and variety of the repertoire that he brings to unfamiliar situa­
tions. Because he is able to see these as elements of his reper­
toire, he is able to make sense of their uniqueness and need
not reduce them to instances of standard categories.
Moreover, each new experience of reflection-in-action en­
riches his repertoire. Petra’s case may function as an exemplar
for new situations. Reflection-in-action in a unique case may
be generalized to other cases, not by giving rise to general prin­
ciples, but by contributing to the practitioner’s repertoire of
exemplary themes from which, in the subsequent cases of his
practice, he may compose new variations.

140

The Structure of Reflection-in-Action

Rigor in On-the-Spot Experiment
Seeing-as is not enough, however. W hen a practitioner sees a
new situation as some element of his repertoire, he gets a new
way of seeing it and a new possibility for action in it, but the
adequacy and utility of his new view must still be discovered
in action. Reflection-in-action necessarily involves experiment.
Indeed, as we have seen, Quist and the Supervisor conduct
reflective conversations with their situations which are experi­
ments in reframing. From their repertoires of examples, im­
ages, descriptions, they have derived (by seeing-as) a way of
framing the present, unique situation. They try, then, to shape
the situation to the frame; and they evaluate the entire process
by criteria 1 have described earlier in this chapter— whether
they can solve the problem they have set; whether they value
what they get when they solve it (or what they can make of
what they get); whether they achieve in the situation a coher­
ence of artifact and idea, a congruence with their fundamental
theories and values; whether they can keep inquiry moving.
Nested within the larger problem-setting experiment, there are
also local experiments of various sorts.
But in what sense is this really experimenting?
T he question arises because there is another sense of experi­
ment which is central to the model of professional knowledge
as technical rationality, one which Quist and the Supervisor,
in their inquiries, do not seem to exemplify at all., In this sense,
experimenting is an activity by which a researcher confirms or
refutes a hypothesis. Its logic is roughly as follows.4
The researcher wants to account for a puzzling phenome­
non, Q. He entertains several hypotheses about Q, each of
which explains it. That is, from each hypothesis, if true, Q
would follow. Suppose, for example, that the question were one

141

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

of discovering how mosquitoes find their way to their warm­
blooded targets.5 A researcher might entertain three hypothe­
ses: that they are attracted to the target by distinctive smells,
by temperature, or by humidity. Then the explanatory relation
might look like this: “ If the target is humid, and mosquitoes
are attracted to humidity/' then “ mosquitoes are attracted to
the target (other conditions being equal)."
But how does the researcher determine which of the hypoth­
eses is correct? John Stuart Mill's description of the logic of ex­
perimental method still seems to me to be the most useful. He
identified three fundamental methods of experiment. Given
phenomenon Q and competing hypotheses A, B and C,
•

•

•

The Method of Agreement consists in showing that when A
(or B or C) is present, Q is also present. For example, when
the target exceeds a certain threshold of humidity, then mos­
quitoes are attracted to it.
The Method of Difference consists in showing that when A
{otB or C) is absent, then Q is also absent. For example, when
the target is not humid, then mosquitoes are not attracted to
it.
The Method of Concomitant Variations consists in showing
that variations in A (or B or C) are accompanied by compara­
ble variations in Q. For example, when the target's humidity
varies, the degree of mosquitoes' attraction to it also varies.

Some version of the Method of Difference is essential to valid
experimental inference. For when A and Q are co-present,
there may be some other factor— C, for example— which is
also co-present and is the cause of Q . For example, if the dis­
tinctive smells always accompany humidity when mosquitoes
are attracted to a target such as a human hand, how can the
experimenter distinguish the effects of smell from the effects
of humidity? In order to make such a discrimination, he must
be able to produce a situation in which he can selectively con­

142

The Structure of Reflection-in-Action
trol the presence, or absence, or variation of the several vari­
ables named by the competing hypotheses. For example, re­
searchers have devised an artificial target in which they can
produce and vary independently the intensity of smell, temper­
ature, or humidity. They have been able to show that, in the
absence of smell, a combination of temperature and humidity
will attract mosquitoes; whereas the distinctive smells of
human skin, in the absence of temperature and humidity in
the required ranges, will fail to do so.
The method of experimental hypothesis testing follows a
process of elimination. The experimenter tries to produce con­
ditions that disconfirm each of the competing hypotheses, by
showing that the conditions that would follow from each hy­
pothesis are not the observed ones. As Karl Popper has put it,6
the experimenter conducts a competition among hypotheses,
rather like a horse race. The hypothesis that most successfully
resists refutation is the one that he accepts. Popper also points
out, however, that hypotheses must always be accepted tenta­
tively. For another hypothesis might be found which resists ref­
utation more successfully still. For example, there might be
some other factor, as yet undiscovered, which is present along
with humidity and temperature and in the absence of which
mosquitoes are no longer attracted to the target.
In order to stage such a competition of hypotheses, employ­
ing M ill’s Methods of Agreement and Difference (or Concom ­
itant Variations), the experimenter must be able to achieve se­
lective variation of the factors named by the competing
hypotheses. He must be able to vary the degree of humidity,
for example, while keeping temperature and smell constant.
And he must also be able to isolate the experimental situation
from confounding changes in the environment— a human
smell wafted into the apparatus, for example. These are central
functions of the research laboratory. If laboratory experiment

M3

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

is not feasible or desirable, the experimenter may have recourse
to records of large numbers of naturally occurring variations
of the phenomena in which he is interested. T o these records
he can apply the Method of Concomitant Variations, through
statistical analysis of naturally occurring correlations of vari­
ables. In this case, he simulates, or provides a substitute for,
the technique of laboratory experiment.
In association with this model of controlled experiment,
there is also the requirement for a particular kind of stance to­
ward inquiry. T he experimenter is expected to adhere to norms
of control, objectivity, and distance. By controlling the experi­
mental process, he is to achieve objectivity, seeing to it that
other inquirers who employ the same methods will achieve the
same results. And to this end, he is expected to preserve his
distance from experimental phenomena, keeping his biases and
interests from affecting the object of study.
Under conditions of everyday professional practice the
norms of controlled experiment are achievable only in a very
limited way. The practitioner is usually unable to shield his ex­
periments from the effects of confounding changes in the envi­
ronment. The practice situation often changes rapidly, and
may change out from under the experiment. Variables are
often locked into one another, so that the inquirer cannot sepa­
rate them. The practice situation is often uncertain, in the
sense that one doesn’t know what the variables are. And the
very act of experimenting is often risky.
Hence, according to the model of Technical Rationality,
emphasis is placed on the separation of research from practice.
On this view, practice should be based on scientific theory
achievable only through controlled experiment, which cannot
be conducted rigorously in practice. So to researchers and the
research setting falls the development of basic and applied sci­
ence, while to practitioners and the practice setting falls the

144

The Structure of Reflection-in-Action
use of scientific theories to achieve the instrumental goals of
practice.
On this view, reflection-in-action is not really experiment.
In what, then, does the experimenting of Quist and the Su­
pervisor consist? W hat is the logic of experimental inference
which they employ? In what sense, if any, is their experiment­
ing rigorous?
Let us step back to consider what experimenting means. I
want to show that hypothesis-testing experiment is only one
of several kinds of experiment, each of which has its own logic
and its own criteria of success and failure. Because in practice
these several kinds of experiment are mixed up together, exper­
iment in practice is of a different order than experiment in the
context of research.
In the most generic sense, to experiment is to act in order
to see what the action leads to. The most fundamental experi­
mental question is, “ W hat if?”
W hen action is undertaken only to see what follows, without
accompanying predictions or expectations, I shall call it explor­
atory experiment. This is much of what an infant does when
he explores the world around him, what an artist does when
he juxtaposes colors to see what effect they make, and what
a newcomer does when he wanders around a strange neighbor­
hood. It is also what a scientist often does when he first encoun­
ters and probes a strange substance to see how it will respond.
Exploratory experiment is essential to the sort of science that
does not appear in the scientific journals, because it has been
screened out of the scientists’ accounts of experimental results
(perhaps because it does not conform to the norms of con­
trolled experiment). Exploratory experiment is the probing,
playful activity by which we get a feel for things. It succeeds
when it leads to the discovery of something there.
There is another way in which we sometimes do things in

M5

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

order to see what happens: we take action in order to produce
an intended change. A carpenter who wants to make a struc­
ture stable tries fastening a board across the angle of a corner.
A chess player advances his pawn in order to protect his queen.
A parent gives his child a quarter to keep the child from crying.
I shall call these move-testing experiments. Any deliberate ac­
tion undertaken with an end in mind is, in this sense, an experi­
ment. In the simplest case, where there are no unintended out­
comes and one either gets the intended consequences or does
not, I shall say that the move is affirmed when it produces what
is intended for it and is negated when it does not. In more com­
plicated cases, however, moves produce effects beyond those
intended. One can get very good things without intending
them, and very bad things may accompany the achievement
of intended results. Here the test of the affirmation of a move
is not only Do you get what you intend? but Do you like what
you get? In chess, when you accidentally checkmate your oppo­
nent, the move is good and you do not take it back because
its results are unexpected? On the other hand, giving a child
a quarter may not only get him to stop crying, but also teach
him to make money by crying— and the unintended effect is
not so good. In these cases a better description of the logic of
move-testing experiments is this: Do you like what you get
from the action, taking its consequences as a whole? If you do,
then the move is affirmed. If you do not, it is negated.
A third kind of experimenting, hypothesis testing, I have al­
ready described. Hypothesis-testing experiment succeeds when
it effects an intended discrimination among competing hy­
potheses. If, for a given hypothesis, its predicted consequences
fit what is observed, and the predictions derived from alterna­
tive hypotheses conflict with observation, then we can say that
the first hypothesis has been confirmed and the others, disconfirmed— or, in Popper’s more accurate formulation, the first

146

The Structure of Reflection-in-Action
hypothesis has demonstrated a greater competitive resistance
to refutation.
In practice, the hypothesis subjected to experiment may be
one that has been implicit in the pattern of one’s moves, like
the geometric center and center of gravity theories of the
block-balancing experiments. In the on-the-spot experimenting
characteristic of reflection-in-action, the logic of hypothesis
testing is essentially the same as it is in the research context.
If a carpenter asks himself, W hat makes this structure stable?
and begins to experiment to find out— trying now one device,
now another— he is basically in the same business as the re­
search scientist. He puts forward hypotheses and, within the
limits of the constraining features of the practice context, tries
to discriminate among them— taking as disconfirmation of a
hypothesis the failure to get the consequences predicted from
it. The logic of his experimental inference is the same as the
researcher’s.
W hat is it, then, that is distinctive about the experimenting
that goes on in practice?
The practice context is different from the research context
in several important ways, all of which have to do with the rela­
tionship between changing things and understanding them.
The practitioner has an interest in transforming the situation
from what it is to something he likes better. He also has an
interest in understanding the situation, but it is in the service
of his interest in change.
W hen the practitioner reflects-in-action in a case he per­
ceives as unique, paying attention to phenomena and surfacing
his intuitive understanding of them, his experimenting is at
once exploratory, move testing, and hypothesis testing. The
three functions are fulfilled by the very same actions. And from
this fact follows the distinctive character of experimenting in
practice.

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

Let us consider, in this light, the reflection-in-action of Quist
and the Supervisor.
W hen Quist imposes his geometry of parallels onto the
screwy slope, he undertakes a global sequence of moves whose
intent is to transform the situation into one that fits the geome­
try. His move-testing experiment succeeds because he solves
the problem he has set and because, in addition, he likes what
he can make of what he gets.
The Supervisor’s situation, the experienced situation, is the
one he perceives through the Resident’s reports. In his framing
of the problem of the situation, he focusses on the need to con­
nect two streams of experience— the patient’s experience in
therapy and outside it— and in solving the problem, he con­
nects them.
In both cases, the global moves are affirmed.
T he practitioners’ moves also function as exploratory probes
of their situations. Their moves stimulate the situation’s backtalk, which causes them to appreciate things in the situation
that go beyond their initial perceptions of the problem. Quist
perceives a new whole idea, created unexpectedly by the gal­
lery’s appearance as centerpiece of the design. For the Supervi­
sor, there is the surprising story of the patient’s fight with her
boyfriend, which signals the patient’s passivity and dependence
and sets the course of his inquiry toward a new interpretive
synthesis. In both cases, the exploratory experiment consists
in the practitioner’s conversation with the situation, in the
back-talk which he elicits and appreciates.
In both cases, further, the practitioner’s reframing of the
problem of the situation carries with it a hypothesis about the
situation. He surfaces the model of the phenomena associated
with his student’s framing of the problem, which he rejects.
He proposes a new problem and with it, a new model of the

148

The Structure of Reflection-in-Action
phenomena, which he proceeds to treat as a hypothesis to be
tested.
In Quist’s case, the hypothesis is that this slope and this ge­
ometry of parallels can be made to fit one another. In the Su­
pervisor’s case, it is that the patient’s transference will reveal
how she is stuck in her therapy as she is stuck in her relation­
ship with her boyfriend.
W hen we compare the practitioner’s hypothesis-testing ex­
periment to the method of controlled experiment, however,
there are several notable differences.
The practitioner makes his hypothesis come true. He acts
as though his hypothesis were in the imperative mood.7 He
says, in effect, “ Let it be the case that X . . .” , and shapes the
situation so that X becomes true. Quist carves his geometry
into the slope. The Supervisor channels his inquiry toward sto­
ries which illustrate the patient’s transference and probes them
to elicit themes suitable for explanation in terms of the trans­
ference. T he practitioner’s hypothesis testing consists of moves
that change the phenomena to make the hypothesis fit.
T he practitioner violates the canon of controlled experi­
ment, which calls for objectivity and distance. In controlled
experiment, the inquirer is supposed to refrain from imposing
his biases and interests on the situation under study. He is sup­
posed to avoid what, in the context of human beings, is popu­
larly called the “ Hawthorne Effect.” 8 It is true that in labora­
tory experiment, experimenters are also expected to
manipulate the experimental phenomena (as the researchers
manipulate the mosquitoes’ attraction to their artificial target).
But their experiment has to do with a type of naturally occur­
ring phenomenon which they study through the artificial situa­
tion of the laboratory. They manipulate the artificial situation,
but leave the naturally occurring phenomena alone. Moreover,

M9

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

the canon of experimental method prohibits them from influ­
encing the experimental situation to make it conform to their
hypotheses; on the contrary, they are expected to strive for disconfirmation.
In the inquiries of Quist and the Supervisor, the unique situ­
ation at hand is the domain of inquiry. As the inquirers influ­
ence it, they influence the totality of their object of study. And
they seek to exert influence in such a way as to confirm, not
refute, their hypotheses.
Nevertheless, their situations are not wholly manipulable.
They may resist the inquirers’ attempts to shape them and in
so doing, may yield unintended effects. Quist might have
found that his slope could not be made to conform to his geom­
etry of parallels, and might then have gone back to try other
geometries. As it is, he sets the criterion of fit so that “ slightly”
is enough. The Supervisor might have found no evidence of
transference of the patient’s life pattern to the therapeutic rela­
tionship— although he does everything he can to set up the
situation so that he will find such evidence. Thus the practi­
tioners’ hypothesis-testing experiments are not wholly selffulfilling.
Their hypothesis-testing experiment is a game with the situ­
ation. They seek to make the situation conform to their hy­
pothesis but remain open to the possibility that it will not.
Thus their hypothesis-testing activity is neither self-fulfilling
prophecy, which insures against the apprehension of d isa ffirm ­
ing data, nor is it the neutral hypothesis testing of the method
of controlled experiment, which calls for the experimenter to
avoid influencing the object of study and to embrace d is a ffir ­
ming data. The practice situation is neither clay to be molded
at will nor an independent, self-sufficient object of study from
which the inquirer keeps his distance.
The inquirer’s relation to this situation is transactional.9 He

150

The Structure of Reflection-in-Action
shapes the situation, but in conversation with it, so that his
own models and appreciations are also shaped by the situation.
The phenomena that he seeks to understand are partly of his
own making; he is in the situation that he seeks to understand.
This is another way of saying that the action by which he
tests his hypothesis is also a move by which he tries to effect
a desired change in the situation, and a probe by which he ex­
plores it. He understands the situation by trying to change it,
and considers the resulting changes not as a defect of experi­
mental method but as the essence of its success.
This fact has an important bearing on the practitioner’s an­
swer to the question, W hen should I stop experimenting?
In the context of controlled experiment, given Popper’s dic­
tum, the experimenter might keep on experimenting indefi­
nitely— as long as he is able to invent new, plausible hypotheses
which might resist refutation more effectively than those he
has already tried. But in practice situations like Quist’s and the
Supervisor’s— where experimental action is also a move and a
probe, where the inquirer’s interest in changing the situation
takes precedence over his interest in understanding it—
hypothesis testing is bounded by appreciations. It is initiated
by the perception of something troubling or promising, and
it is terminated by the production of changes one finds on the
whole satisfactory, or by the discovery of new features which
give the situation new meaning and change the nature of the
questions to be explored. Such events bring hypothesis testing
to a close even when the inquirer has not exhausted his store
of plausible alternative hypotheses.
In Quist’s case, he has made the geometry of parallels work
slightly with the contours of the slope. But other geometries
might also have been made to do so. W hy does he stop here?
Because he has produced changes he has found satisfactory,
has made of unintended outcomes something that he likes, and

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

has produced an unintended artifact which creates a new whole
idea.
In the Supervisor’s case, other interpretive syntheses might
have accounted for the patient’s tendency to keep herself con­
tinually frustrated. Her search for punishment might have
been stimulated not only by angry thoughts or sexual wishes
but by other factors. W hy does the Supervisor not seek and
test alternatives to these hypotheses? Because he has con­
structed an interpretive synthesis which accounts for and ties
together the several stories he has elicited. He has made some­
thing coherent, congruent with his overarching theory, and
susceptible to test by intervention.
It is true that the larger inquiry continues beyond these find­
ings, its further directions set by them. But the experimenter
need discriminate among contending hypotheses only to the
point where his moves are affirmed or yield new appreciations
of the situation. Thus hypothesis-testing experiment has a
more limited function in practice than in research. And be­
cause of this, constraints on controlled experiment in the prac­
tice situation are less disruptive of inquiry than they would oth­
erwise be.
On the other hand, the practice context places demands on
hypothesis testing which are not present in the context of re­
search. The hypothesis must lend itself to embodiment in a
move. Quist has no interest in a hypothesis about the site
which he cannot immediately translate into design. The Super­
visor has no interest in hypotheses about the patient which are
not immediately translatable into interpretive inquiry which
can be tested in the intervention.
These distinctive features of experimenting in practice carry
with them distinctive norms for rigor. The inquirer who reflects-in-action plays a game with the situation in which he is
bound by considerations relevant to the three levels of experi­

152

The Structure of Reflection-in-Action
ment— exploration, move testing, and hypothesis testing. His
primary interest is in changing the situation. But if he ignores
its resistances to change, he falls into mere self-fulfilling proph­
ecy. He experiments rigorously when he strives to make the
situation conform to his view of it, while at the same time he
remains open to the evidence of his failure to do so. He must
learn by reflection on the situation’s resistance that his hypoth­
esis is inadequate, and in what way, or that his framing of the
problem is inadequate, and in what way. Moreover, he plays
his game in relation to a moving target, changing the phenom­
ena as he experiments. W hether he ought to reflect-in-action,
and how he ought to experiment, will depend on the changes
produced by his earlier moves. The full range of changes, those
that match or fail to match his expectations together with
those that fall outside the scope of his intentions, are encom­
passed in this schema:

Desirability of all
Consequences in relation to intention

perceived consequences,
intended or unintended

1.

Surprise

Undesirable

2.

Surprise

Desirable or neutral

34-

N o surprise

Desirable or neutral

N o surprise

Undesirable

The first is a typical case for reflection-in-action. The move
fails to produce its intended result, and its consequences, in­
tended and unintended, are considered undesirable. The move
is negated and the theory associated with it is refuted. The in­
quirer then responds to the negation of the move by reflecting
on its underlying theory.
Consider, as an example of this process, Petra’s early report
of her experiments with classroom units.

153

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION
I had six of these classroom units, but they were
too small in scale to do much with.

So 1 changed them to this much more signifi­
cant layout (the L-shapes). It relates one to two,
three to four, and five to six, which is more what
I wanted to do educationally anyway. W hat I
have is a space in here which is more of a home
base.

Here we have a sequence of two experiments. In the first,
Petra's implicit theory of action might be described as some­
thing like
If you want a satisfactory arrangement of the
classrooms, make it like this.

But she finds the arrangement unsatisfactory and attributes
that outcome to the fact that the units were “ too small in scale
to do much with." She says, in effect,
I had the view that something satisfactory could be made with
units of that size, but I was wrong.

She then invents a new arrangement, and finds it (as she seems
to have expected) “ much more significant." She also becomes
aware of additional, apparently unintended benefits: the new
arrangement puts proximate grades next to one another and
it yields a partially protected space which she calls a “ home
base."
The two experiments are chained together in a learning se-

*54

The Structure of Reflection-in-Action
quence. Petra's first move fails to produce the results intended
for it and yields a situation which she finds on the whole unsat­
isfactory. She responds by surfacing the theory which she be­
lieves had led to her false expectation (here, a theory of the
scale appropriate to classroom units), making a theory response
to error. She criticizes and restructures her theory, and tests
her new theory by producing the more aggregated L-shaped
units. She gets the result she intended; hence, her new theory
is not refuted. And she also gets some other unintended conse­
quences which, along with the intended ones, she considers
desirable; her new move is affirmed.
W hen a move fails to do what is intended and produces con­
sequences considered on the whole to be undesirable, the in­
quirer surfaces the theory implicit in the move, criticizes it,
restructures it, and tests the new theory by inventing a move
consistent with it. The learning sequence, initiated by the ne­
gation of a move, terminates when new theory leads to a new
move which is affirmed.
From the point of view of the logic of confirmation, the re­
sults of experiment remain ambiguous. Other theories of action
or models might also account for the failure of the earlier move
and the success of the later one. But in the practice context,
priority is placed on the interest in change and therefore on
the logic of affirmation. It is the logic of affirmation which sets
the boundaries of experimental rigor.
The priority of the logics of affirmation and exploration over
the logic of confirmation also becomes clear when we con­
sider the other outcomes of experiment identified in our sche­
ma. In the second case, the inquirer's expectation is disap­
pointed but the consequences taken as a whole are considered
desirable. The associated theory is refuted but the move is af­
firmed. Petra might have designed the gallery as a pass-

255

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

through, for example; she might then have decided that it
worked badly as a pass-through but did fulfill a formal func­
tion, which justified it. In this case, Petra need not reflect on
the theory which underlay her move. According to the logic
of affirmation, the move has succeeded. Petra may wonder
why her gallery failed to work as expected. But she need not
reflect on it unless she wishes to consider the present case as
a preparation for future cases where problems of circulation
are also likely to arise.
In the third case, the move produces its intended outcome
and its consequences are taken on the whole to be desirable.
There is no need for reflection-in-action, unless the inquirer—
again considering the present case as a preparation for future
cases— were to ask himself to account for his present success.
In the fourth case, the move produces the expected results
but it also causes unintended changes which are found, on the
whole, to be unsatisfactory. Petra places the gym where she
had wanted it, for example, in order to give direct access to
the field. But she finds that her placement of it has constricted
the space and spoiled the whole geometry of the buildings on
the site. Here there will be reflection on the theory associated
with the move, but it will focus on the theory’s scope of rele­
vance rather than its truth. Realizing that she has failed to con­
sider the formal consequences of her move, Petra may consider
new theories which take such factors into account. In the learn­
ing sequence which she then sets in motion, her new theories
will refer not only to access but to the openness of the space
and to the global geometry of the buildings on the site.
Thus the perceived changes produced by earlier moves de­
termine the need for and the direction appropriate to reflection-in-action. The logic of on-the-spot experiment is three­
fold, and rigor in hypothesis testing is in the service of
affirmation or exploration.
&

The Structure of Reflection-in-Action

Virtual Worlds
The situations of Quist and the Supervisor are, in important
ways, not the real thing. Quist is not moving dirt on the site.
T he Supervisor is not talking to the patient. Each is operating
in a virtual world, a constructed representation of the real
world of practice.
This fact is significant for the question of rigor in experi­
menting. In his virtual world, the practitioner can manage
some of the constraints to hypothesis-testing experiment which
are inherent in the world of his practice. Hence his ability to
construct and manipulate virtual worlds is a crucial component
of his ability not only to perform artistically but to experiment
rigorously.
For Quist and Petra, the graphic world of the sketchpad is
the medium of reflection-in-action. Here they can draw and
talk their moves in spatial-action language, leaving traces which
represent the forms of buildings on the site. Because the draw­
ing reveals qualities and relations unimagined beforehand,
moves can function as experiments. Petra can discover that her
building shapes do not fit the slope and that her classrooms
are too small in scale to do much with. Quist can find nooks
in the intervals he has created and can see that his geometry
works slightly with the contours of the site. Considering the
gallery he has made, he can observe that “ there is this which
is repetitive and this again which is not repetitive.”
Constraints which would prevent or inhibit experiment in
the built world are greatly reduced in the virtual world of the
drawing.
The act of drawing can be rapid and spontaneous, but the
residual traces are stable. The designer can examine them at
leisure.

157

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

The pace of action can be varied at will. The designer can
slow down, to think about what he is doing. On the other hand,
events that would take a long time in the built world— the carv­
ing of a slope, the shaving of the trees— can be made to “ hap­
pen” immediately in the drawing.
No move is irreversible. The designer can try, look, and by
shifting to another sheet of paper, try again. As a consequence,
he can perform learning sequences in which he corrects his er­
rors and takes account of previously unanticipated results of
his moves. Petra can explore the size and shape of her class­
room units and the placement of the administration building.
Quist can propose that she “ draw and draw” to determine the
proper dimensions of her grid, figure out how to treat the “ mid­
dle area” and “ shave off the trees.” Moves that would be costly
in the built world can be tried at little or no risk in the world
of the drawing.
It is possible to eliminate changes in the environment which
would disrupt or confound experiment. In the drawing, there
are no work stoppages, breakdowns of equipment, or soil condi­
tions which would make it impossible to sink a foundation.
Some variables which are interlocking in the built world can
be separated from one another in the world of the drawing.
A global geometry of buildings on the site can be explored
without any reference to particular construction methods. A
building shape can be considered while deferring the question
of the material from which the shape is to be made.
In order to capture the benefits of the drawn world as a con­
text for experiment, the designer must acquire certain compe­
tences and understandings. He needs to learn the traditions
of graphic media, languages and notations. Quist, for example,
has a repertoire of media which enables him to choose the
graphic system best suited to the exploration of particular phe­
nomena. Sketches enable him to explore global geometries;

158

The Structure of Reflection-in-Action
cross-sectional drawings, to examine three-dimensional effects;
drawing to scale, to experiment with the dimensions of design;
models, to examine relationships of building masses, compara­
tive volumes, sun, and shade. He uses media selectively to ad­
dress the issues to which he gives priority at each stage of the
design process.
Quist has also learned to use graphic languages transparent­
ly. W hen he represents a contour of the site by a set of concen­
tric lines, he sees through it to the actual shapes of the slope,
just as practiced readers can see through the letters on a page
to words and meanings. Hence he is able to move in the draw­
ing as though he were moving through buildings on the site,
exploring the felt-paths as a user of the building would experi­
ence them.
But the virtual world of the drawing can function reliably
as a context for experiment only insofar as the results of experi­
ment can be transferred to the built world. The validity of the
transfer depends on the reliability with which the drawn world
represents the built one. As an architect’s practice enables him
to move back and forth between drawing and building, he
learns how his drawings will “build” and develops a capacity
for accurate rehearsal. He learns to recognize the representa­
tional limits of graphic media. He learns, for example, how
drawings fail to capture qualities of materials, surfaces, and
technologies. He learns to remember that drawings cannot rep­
resent soil conditions, wind, costs of materials and labor, break­
downs of equipment, and man-made changes in the environ­
ment. Drawing functions as a context for experiment precisely
because it enables the designer to eliminate features of the realworld situation which might confound or disrupt his experi­
ments, but when he comes to interpret the results of his experi­
ments, he must remember the factors that have been eliminat­
ed.

159

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

The Supervisor constructs, through his interactions with the
Resident, a virtual world of talk which represents the experi­
enced world of therapist and patient. Storytelling represents
and substitutes for firsthand experience.
By his selective questions and acts of attention, the Supervi­
sor shapes the experienced situation to which he will address
interpretive inquiry. Like Quist, he is able to hold some fea­
tures of the situation constant. Once a story has been told, it
can be held as a datum, considered at leisure for its meanings
and its relationships with other stories. Transient events,
widely separate in time, can be held steady and juxtaposed with
one another to permit exploration of such phenomena as de­
pendency or guilt. Some stories can be ignored, or reduced to
mere outlines, while others are expanded and elaborated. By
attending to a few features which he considers central, the Su­
pervisor can isolate the main thread of a story from the sur­
rounding factors which he chooses to consider as noise. And
by putting a term to his questioning or attention, he can set
the boundaries of the universe of data which will serve as mate­
rial for his experiments in interpretation. Trying now one inter­
pretation, now another, he can make his experimental moves
reversible and design his own learning sequences.
But in the therapeutic context, the practitioner’s world is
virtual in a twofold sense. The Resident’s stories can be used
to represent the therapeutic interaction, and the therapeutic
interaction can be shaped to become a representation of the
patient’s life outside of therapy. In fact, the Supervisor tries
to get the Resident to do precisely this when he urges him
to tell his patient that “ here, in the relationship with you, she
can see what is going on and you can work it out together.”
The power of the transference lies in its use as a world repre­
sentative of the patient’s other relationships. In such a world,
it becomes possible to slow down phenomena which would

160

The Structure of Reflection-in-Action
ordinarily be lost to reflection. Actions which might be other­
wise irreversible can be examined for their meanings, revised,
and tried again. Once the transference has become an object
of shared inquiry, the therapist can experiment with moves
that would ordinarily carry a risk of angering or alienating the
patient.
T he therapist’s ability to use the transference as a virtual
world depends on his ability to read its signs. He must become
adept at listening to the patient’s utterances as moves compara­
ble to those she uses in the life outside. As the Supervisor com­
ments,
And yet she will find ways of distancing you, just as she does her
boyfriend.

Further, the therapist must become adept at converting his re­
lationship with the patient into a world of inquiry in which
thoughts and feelings can be seen as sources of discovery rather
than as triggers to action. T he therapist’s ability to make this
happen depends both on his ability to reflect on his experience
of being with the patient, detecting the signs of his own coun­
tertransference, and on his ability to elicit the patient’s trust.
This depends, in turn, on his ability to empathize with the pa­
tient, to establish and honor the norms of their mutual obliga­
tion, and to help the patient gain insight from revealed
thoughts and feelings so that the effort of the special relation­
ship comes to seem worthwhile. T he creation and maintenance
of the virtual world of therapy is both a method of inquiry and
a strategy of intervention.
But the representative reliability of the virtual world has its
limits. The Resident can guess, but cannot know, that the pa­
tient’s decision to remain in therapy is a response to his becom­
ing “ the bastard she needs.” He cannot be sure that her way

161

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

of keeping herself frustrated in therapy is similar to her contin­
ual self-frustration outside of therapy. Only through further ex­
perience with the patient, as she risks bringing more of herself
into the therapeutic relationship, can he test such inferences
as these.
The therapist's use of the transference and the architect's
sketchpad are examples of the variety of virtual worlds on
which all the professions are dependent. A sculptor learns to
infer from the feel of a maquette in his hand the qualities of
a monumental figure that will be built from it. Engineers be­
come adept at the uses of scale models, wind tunnels, and com­
puter simulations. In an orchestra rehearsal, conductors experi­
ment with tempo, phrasing, and instrumental balance. A roleplay is an improvised game in which the participants learn to
discover properties of an interpersonal situation and to reflectin-action on their intuitive responses to it. In improvisation,
musical or dramatic, participants can conduct on-the-spot ex­
periments in which, as improvisation tends towards perfor­
mance, the boundaries between virtual and real worlds may be­
come blurred.
Virtual worlds are contexts for experiment within which
practitioners can suspend or control some of the everyday im­
pediments to rigorous reflection-in-action. They are representa­
tive worlds of practice in the double sense of “ practice." And
practice in the construction, maintenance, and use of virtual
worlds develops the capacity for reflection-in-action which we
call artistry.

162

The Structure of Reflection-in-Action

Stance Toward Inquiry
A practitioner’s stance toward inquiry is his attitude toward
the reality with which he deals.
According to the model of Technical Rationality, there is
an objectively knowable world, independent of the practition­
er’s values and views. In order to gain technical knowledge of
it, the practitioner must maintain a clear boundary between
himself and his object of inquiry. In order to exert technical
control over it, he must observe it and keep his distance from
it— as Bacon said, commanding Nature by obeying her. His
stance toward inquiry is that of spectator/manipulator.
In a practitioner’s reflective conversation with a situation
that he treats as unique and uncertain, he functions as an
agent/experient.10 Through his transaction with the situation,
he shapes it and makes himself a part of it. Hence, the sense
he makes of the situation must include his own contribution
to it. Y et he recognizes that the situation, having a life of its
own distinct from his intentions, may foil his projects and re­
veal new meanings.
From this paradoxical source derive the several features of
a stance toward inquiry which are as necessary to reflection-in­
action as the norms of on-the-spot experiment and the uses of
virtual worlds.
The inquirer must impose an order of his own, jumping
rather than falling into his transaction with the situation. Thus
the Supervisor tries to get the Resident to recognize his contri­
bution to the patient’s stalemate and to see in the transference
a medium for inquiry and intervention. Thus Quist tries to get
Petra to see that coherence does not exist in the site but must
be imposed upon it by the designer. But the inquirer must also
take responsibility for the order he imposes. As Quist draws

163

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

to scale and the Supervisor probes the Resident’s stories, they
engage in a disciplined pursuit of the implications of their
chosen frames.
A t the same time that the inquirer tries to shape the situa­
tion to his frame, he must hold himself open to the situation’s
back-talk. He must be willing to enter into new confusions and
uncertainties. Hence, he must adopt a kind of double vision.11
He must act in accordance with the view he has adopted, but he
must recognize that he can always break it open later, indeed,
must break it open later in order to make new sense of his trans­
action with the situation. This becomes more difficult to do as
the process continues. His choices become more committing;
his moves, more nearly irreversible. As the risk of uncertainty in­
creases, so does the temptation to treat the view as the reality.
Nevertheless, if the inquirer maintains his double vision, even
while deepening his commitment to a chosen frame, he in­
creases his chances of arriving at a deeper and broader coher­
ence of artifact and idea.
His ability to do this depends on certain relatively constant
elements that he may bring to a situation otherwise in flux:
an overarching theory, an appreciative system, and a stance of
reflection-in-action which can become, in some practitioners,
an ethic for inquiry.

Technical Rationality and Reflection-in-Action
Compared
As we have described similarities of patterns and principles in
Quist’s designing and the Supervisor’s therapeutic inquiry, we
have also begun to describe an epistemology of reflection-in­

164

The Structure of Reflection-in-Action
action which accounts for artistry in situations of uniqueness
and uncertainty. On this view of professional knowing, techni­
cal problem solving occupies a limited place within the inquir­
er’s reflective conversation with his situation; the model of
Technical Rationality appears as radically incomplete.
The Positivist epistemology of practice rests on three dichot­
omies. Given the separation of means from ends, instrumen­
tal problem solving can be seen as a technical procedure to
be measured by its effectiveness in achieving a pre-established
objective. Given the separation of research from practice, rig­
orous practice can be seen as an application to instrumental
problems of research-based theories and techniques whose ob­
jectivity and generality derive from the method of controlled
experiment. Given the separation of knowing from doing,
action is only an implementation and test of technical deci­
sion.
In the reflective conversations of Quist and the Supervisor,
these dichotomies do not hold. For Quist and the Supervisor,
practice is a kind of research. In their problem setting, means
and ends are framed interdependently. And their inquiry is a
transaction with the situation in which knowing and doing are
inseparable.
These inquirers encounter a problematic situation whose re­
ality they must construct. As they frame the problem of the
situation, they determine the features to which they will at­
tend, the order they will attempt to impose on the situation,
the directions in which they will try to change it. In this pro­
cess, they identify both the ends to be sought and the means
to be employed. In the ensuing inquiry, action on the situa­
tion is integral with deciding, and problem solving is a part
of the larger experiment in problem setting. For example,
Quist applies his rules of thumb, about the uses of slopes ap­

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

propriate to their various grades, as a component of the larger
experiment in which he tries to impose a geometry of paral­
lels onto the site. His frame experiment sets the problem to
be solved, and his problem-solving is one element in his test
of the frame.
Quist and the Supervisor reflect on their students’ intuitive
understandings of the phenomena before them and construct
new problems and models derived, not from application of re­
search-based theories, but from their repertoires of familiar
examples and themes. Through seeing as and doing as, they
make and test new models of the situation. But their on-thespot experiments, conducted in the virtual worlds of sketch­
pad and storytelling, also function as transforming moves and
exploratory probes. Hypothesis testing has the limited func­
tion of enabling them to achieve satisfactory moves or to sur­
face phenomena which cause them to reframe the situation.
The values of control, distance, and objectivity, central to
the model of Technical Rationality, take on new meanings in
the reflective conversation. Here the inquirer tries, within the
limits of his virtual world, to control variables for the sake of
hypothesis-testing experiment. But his hypothesis is about the
situation’s potential for transformation, and in the testing pro­
cess he steps into the situation. He produces knowledge that
is objective, in the sense that he can disconfirm it. He can dis­
cover that he has not achieved satisfactory change or that he
ought to undertake change of a different order. But his knowl­
edge is also personal, bounded by his commitments to apprecia­
tive system and overarching theory. It is compelling only to
members of a community of inquiry who share these commit­
ments.12
In the following chapters, we will explore other examples of
knowing-in-practice which exhibit, in greater or lesser degree,

166

The Structure of Reflection-in-Action
the process of reflective conversation with the situation which
we have so far observed only in the practices of Quist and the
Supervisor. W e will examine how reflection-in-action varies
with the context and domain-specific knowledge of other prac­
titioners, and we will inquire into the contextual factors which
set limits to reflection-in-action.

16/

6
Reflective Practice
in the Science-Based
Professions

What Are the Science-Based Professions?
Medicine, agronomy, and engineering are prototypical exam­
ples of professions which have a basis in scientific knowledge.
Many others, such as dentistry, optometry, meteorology, nurs­
ing, management, forestry, are, in Glazer’s words,
either based directly on science or contain a high component of
strictly technological knowledge based on science in the education
which they provide.1

Under the model of Technical Rationality, practitioners of
these professions are seen as technical problem solvers. Physi-

168

Reflective Practice in the Science-Based Professions
cians use techniques of diagnosis and treatment based on the
physiology of disease. W ith research-based theories and tech­
niques, agronomists solve problems of agricultural productivity,
soil erosion, plant disease, and insect control. Production engi­
neers use theories and techniques of statistical analysis and op­
timization to solve problems of product quality and production
efficiency. Construction engineers apply the results of research
on soil conditions and building structures to select types of
building foundations.
According to the model of Technical Rationality, such prob­
lem solving is a manipulation of available techniques to achieve
chosen ends in the face of manageable constraints. In Simon’s
more sophisticated language, there is an objective function
which measures performance, a set of possible strategies of ac­
tion, and a range of techniques of implementation; strategies
and techniques may be compared in terms of their probable
costs and their effectiveness in achieving the objective func­
tion. An occupation moves from craft to profession as it ap­
proximates this model of technical problem solving, and it be­
comes science based as its techniques are grounded in the
theories of basic and applied research. According to the ex­
change relationship described early in this century by Veblen,
practitioners give their problems to researchers, who give to
practitioners new theories and techniques for problem solving.
Each practitioner of a science-based profession is seen as en­
gaging in a very limited kind of on-the-spot inquiry. He asks,
Have I selected the right problem from my stock of known
problems? Have I selected the right problem-solving technique
from my stock of known techniques? He makes a threefold
mapping of the signs of the present situation onto known prob­
lems and techniques. Recent studies of medical diagnosis, for
example, have shown that this mapping can become extraordi­
narily complex. Using the framework of artificial intelligence,

169

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

some researchers have described the literally millions of facts,
rules of inference, and heuristics which skillful clinicians use
to describe and diagnose a present illness.2 But for all of their
complexity, these studies still treat the process of clinical diag­
nosis as a mapping of cues in the present situation to the clini­
cian’s theories of disease and methods of treatment.
If we turn from the model of Technical Rationality to the
actual practice of science-based professionals, however, it is
clear that technical problem solving is a radically incomplete
description of what engineers, agronomists, and physicians ac­
tually do. They solve technical problems, but they also do other
things.
W hen practitioners choose to address new or unique prob­
lems which do not fit known categories, their inquiry is not
a threefold mapping of the kind I have just described, but a
design process artistic in nature and fundamentally similar in
structure to the reflective conversations analyzed in the previ­
ous chapter. And when science-based practitioners try to take
account of the larger context of their inquiry, only some ele­
ments of which are within their control, they must construct
a manageable problem from a problematic situation. In the
first kind of case, the practitioner reflects-in-action on puzzling
phenomena which are new to him, even though they fall
within normal boundaries of a technical practice. In the sec­
ond, he reflects-in-action on a larger situation that impinges
on his activity even though it falls outside what are normally
considered the boundaries of the profession.

I/O

Reflective Practice in the Science-Based Professions

The Art of Engineering Design
E n gin eerin g is a particularly interesting field in w h ich to co n ­
sider th e relationship betw een technical problem solving and
reflection-in-action, for in this field w e have w itnessed, in the
period follow ing W o r ld W a r II, both an a ttem p t to redefine
en gineerin g as an applied science and a subsequent discovery
o f the lim its o f that redefinition.
A fte r W o rld W a r II, in th e glow of en gineering trium phs
w h ich w ould have been im possible w ith ou t th e contributions
o f physics, and later on under th e shadow o f Sputnik, th e advo­
cates o f en gineering science had succeeded in transform ing the
en gineerin g curriculum into an education in applied physics.
By the late 1960s, how ever, leading practitioners and educators
w ere begin n in g to have second thoughts. H arvey Brooks, th e
dean o f the H arvard en gineerin g program , was am ong th e first
to point out the weakness o f an im age o f en gineering based
exclusively on en gineerin g science. In his 1967 article, “ D ile m ­
mas o f E n gin eerin g E d u c a tio n / '3 he described th e predica­
m ent o f the practicin g engineer w ho is expected to bridge the
gap betw een a rapidly changing body o f know ledge and the
rapidly changing expectations o f society. T h e resulting dem and
for adaptability, Brooks th ou gh t, required an art of en gineer­
ing. B ut th e scientizing o f the en gineering schools had been
inten ded to m ove engineering from art to science.
A id ed b y the enorm ous public support for science in th e pe­
riod 19 5 3 -6 7 , the engineering schools had placed their bets
on an en gineerin g science oriented to “ th e possibility of the
n e w " rather than to the “ design cap ab ility" o f m aking som e­
th in g useful; and w ith this shift o f em phasis, th e specialist in
a discipline becam e the m ost pow erful m em ber of th e en gi­
neering faculty. Brooks saw in this individual a set of values

171

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

and attitudes not always compatible with the values and
needs of the professional “ who plans to devote himself to ser­
vice, as the great majority must do.” Like Glazer, he saw that
the problem becomes more acute if the “ intellectual stature
of the disciplinary scientist within a professional school is sen­
sibly above that of the faculty representing the profession it­
self.” Practicing engineers are no longer powerful role models
when the professors of highest status are engineering scien­
tists. Under these circumstances, engineering schools con­
fronted a new. problem, “ the relationship between science
and art in the training of the professionals.” But by 1967 en­
gineering design had virtually disappeared from the curricu­
lum, and the question of the relationship between science
and art was no longer alive.
Brooks, who wished to bring this question back to life, per­
ceived that the art of engineering design presents an educa­
tional dilemma. If this art is neither known nor invariant, then
how can it be taught?
I propose that engineering design is understandable as a re­
flective conversation with the materials of a situation, a kind
of process similar to the ones we have already observed in archi­
tecture and psychotherapy. Although it cannot be reduced to
an application of general rules or theories, on the model of ap­
plied research, some of its main features are constant and ame­
nable to description.
Let us consider, to begin with, an example of relatively unso­
phisticated engineering design. 1 have chosen an example from
a university practicum in mechanical engineering where the
technology is relatively simple and the outlines of the design
process can be more readily discerned.
Some years ago, I met with faculty and students who were
participating in an experiment in engineering education. In
this program students worked, under faculty supervision, on

172

Reflective Practice in the Science-Based Professions
real-world industrial problems. In our session together, we re­
viewed a project which had been submitted by a manufacturer
of guns. The presenting problem was roughly this:
W e have a hundred-and-fifty-year-old process which produces a
lovely blue patina on the hammers and triggers of our guns. W e
heat the metal in the presence of cow bone imported from Argen­
tina, and then quench it in water. The process has always worked,
though we have no idea why. Recently, we have learned that we
will lose our supply of cow bone. W e want you to develop a new
process that duplicates the old colors exactly and reliably.

The project had been given to a small group of students who
had very little to go on. The manufacturer’s engineers had not
been able to suggest a plan of attack. They had proposed inves­
tigating the surface chemistry of the metal, but this seemed
merely a way of saying that the answer might lie in a field they
knew nothing about.
The students quickly discovered that “ there were a lot of
variables.” Given the fact that in the old process the metal had
been heated to 1600 degrees Fahrenheit, the students decided
to concentrate first on temperature and cooking time, and they
tried to understand the oxide layer of the metal thermodynami­
cally. This seemed to require a very long process of experiment,
however, and as the pressure for performance increased, the
students began to “ fiddle with the variables” and “ fly by the
seat of our pants.” They discovered that they could duplicate
the colors pretty well by cooking the metal in an air furnace
for seven minutes, then quenching the metal in water. But this
left them with a new question: How was it that both the old
and the new methods worked?
As one of the students said, “ W e knew it couldn’t be the
unique properties of cow bone!” In the factory, workers had
heated the metal with cow bone in a closed container; then,

m

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

when they quenched it in water, they exposed it to dissolved
oxygen. Perhaps cow bone had functioned as a “ sacrificial ele­
ment,” taking up oxygen from the surface of the metal, and
perhaps the resulting oxygen deficiency had played an impor­
tant role in the coloring process. By the end of the first semes­
ter’s work, in any case, the students still had no firm explana­
tion of the two processes, and their new process had proved
erratic. Not all the triggers looked alike.
Later in the second semester, one of the manufacturer’s en­
gineers visited them and asked, “ W hat have you been doing?”
This stirred them to purchase a meter to measure dissolved oxy­
gen, and they were able to convince themselves that dissolved
oxygen was a key variable. As one of the students said, “ Up
to that point, we hadn’t acted on our idea. W hen all the vari­
ables seem to be equally important, you do first what’s
easiest.”
Now they still had some uncontrolled variables, but they
thought they understood the problem well enough to begin to
build a prototype to test their concept. They set about design­
ing a furnace which would have a high rate of production and
a low rate of rejection. They decided that the furnace should
be continuous and automated. But immediately they encoun­
tered a new set of difficulties. A particularly annoying effect
was the heat-sagging of the sides of the furnace, which inter­
fered with experimentation. As a result, they decided to go
back to a batch-type “ muffler” furnace. W hen I asked whether
they had been trying to design a production prototype or a ve­
hicle for further experiment, the student who had taken on
the project at this point said, “ I was trying to give them what
they wanted!” And the faculty supervisor explained that he had
thought to himself, “ W hy continue to work on erratic results
in an experimental setup when in the continuous furnace the
whole situation may be different?”

*74

Reflective Practice in the Science-Based Professions
In the muffler furnace, however, the student had been able
to eliminate some of the earlier troubles. Heat-sagging had dis­
appeared, and so had the blistering of the metal which had
marred the results of some earlier experiments. But the student
found that he could produce the desired color and hardness
on only one side of the metal.
His next problem, as he saw it, was to get the desired results
on both sides. He had said, “ If you could get the pieces to fall
in vertically, it would be okay,” and he had begun the design
of a vertical furnace.
Looking back on the whole process, it was clear that the stu­
dents had begun with the problem of explaining why the old
production method worked. They had tried at first to build a
theory of the surface chemistry, but their experiments had
yielded ambiguous results. Pressed by the client to solve the
production problem quickly, they had come upon a new pro­
cess which did not depend on exotic materials, but they were
no more able to explain the new process than they had been
able to explain the old.
Addressing this new problem of explanation, they developed
the “ dissolved oxygen” hypothesis. They now had a process
which did not depend on cow bone and they had a plausible
explanation of its effects, but the product quality was unreli­
able. In what context, now, should they carry out experiments
to improve reliability— in the experimental setup they had
been using, or in a production furnace where conditions might
be “ totally different” ? They opted for the production furnace,
which presented a new set of problems.
The entire inquiry can be represented as a reflective conver­
sation with the materials of the situation, but in this instance
the reflective conversation wove its way through stages of diag­
nosis, experiment, pilot process, and production design, as in
figure 6.x.

m

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

FIGURE 6.1
Stages of Engineering Designy Conceived as a Reflective Conversation

A t each stage of this process, the students were confronted
with puzzles and problems that did not fit their known catego­
ries, yet they had a sense of the kinds of theories (surface chem­
istry, thermodynamics) that might explain these phenomena.
They used their theoretical hunches to guide experiment, but
on several occasions their moves led to puzzling outcomes— a
process that worked, a stubborn defect— on which they then
reflected. Each such reflection gave rise to new experiments
and to new phenomena, troublesome or desirable, which led
to further reflection and experiment. Unlike Quist, these engi­
neering students were able to make liberal use of researchbased theory and technique, but their applications of research
results were embedded in a reflective conversation with the sit­
uation similar in its general outlines to Quist’s designing.

lj6

Reflective Practice in the Science-Based Professions

The Art of Scientific Investigation
Lest it be thought that engineering design takes a form such
as this only in the relatively unsophisticated inquiry of engi­
neering students, I shall turn now to a celebrated example in
which technological invention and scientific discovery are in­
terwoven— the development of the transistor. Here, too, exper­
iment aimed at testing a particular hypothesis or achieving a
particular technological effect repeatedly produces unexpected
phenomena which trigger new hypotheses, goals, and ques­
tions. Experiment functions at the same time to test technolog­
ical moves, discriminate among plausible scientific hypotheses,
and explore puzzling phenomena. A t some points in this pro­
cess, a technological endeavor yields phenomena that provoke
scientific discovery. In others, new technological possibilities
are derived from a scientific explanation. In both cases, the
“ science” in question is not after the fact presentation of
knowledge of the sort usually found in the scientific journals
but before the fact, apparently disorderly research of the kind
sometimes described as “ the art of scientific investigation.” 4
In Richard Nelson’s account of the development of the tran­
sistor at Bell Laboratories in the mid-1940s, he points out that
long before W orld W ar II, scientists had been familiar with
materials now called semiconductors which were known to
have interesting though inexplicable properties.5 “ C at whisk­
er” (semiconductor) rectifiers were widely used in the early
days of the radio industry, but the vacuum tube, whose func­
tions and directions of possible improvement were better un­
derstood, overshadowed semiconductor rectifiers. Still, many
scientists thought about making a semiconductor amplifier.
Their thinking seems to have been motivated by a simple anal­
ogy with vacuum tubes.

177

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION
Vacuum tubes rectified and, with the introduction of a grid, ampli­
fied. Semiconductors rectified. Therefore somehow, they should
be able to amplify.6

Som e researchers proposed inserting a grid into a sem iconduc­
tor diode but, ow ing to the extrem e thinness o f the rectifyin g
area, they w ere unable to do so.
M ean w h ile a theory was taking shape w hich scientists w ould
later see as an explanation o f part o f th e behavior o f sem iconduc­
tors. T h is was A . H . W ilso n 's quantum m echanical m odel o f a
solid sem iconductor, published in 1931. W ilso n described a
sem iconductor as a crystal contain ing tw o different types of cur­
rent carriers, electrons (negatively charged) and holes (posi­
tively charged). W ilso n found that the num ber o f holes and
electrons free to carry current varies w ith the tem perature and
also w ith the purity o f the crystal. A doped germ anium crystal
(an n, or negative, sem iconductor) could be m ade so that it co n ­
tained m any m ore electrons than holes; in crystals o f this type,
electrons are the "m ajo rity" and holes the "m in o rity" carriers.
In crystals o f the p , or positive, type, holes are the m ajority carri­
ers. A junction o ip - and n -typ e crystals conducts current m uch
m ore easily in one direction than in another, because on the n
side m ost o f the charge carriers are negative w hile on the/? side,
m ost of them are positive. In this way, W ilso n had explained
how a p -n junction functions as a rectifier.
H is m odel gave an adequate basis for understanding m uch
of the behavior o ip - and n-typ e sem iconductors, including the
crucial fact of the existence o f m inority carriers, but scientists
missed som e o f th e key points until the work o f Shockley, Brattain, and Bardeen at Bell Laboratories. In th e early stages of
this work, just after W o rld W a r II, Shockley's ideas about m ak­
ing amplifiers shifted from analogy w ith the vacuum tube to
the use of an electric field, im posed from the outside w ithout

178

Reflective Practice in the Science-Based Professions
actually touching the material, to influence the number of
movable electrons in the semiconductor. But devices based on
this principle produced unexpected results. Sometimes even
the sign of the effect was off, and even when the sign was right,
the magnitude of the observed effect was a thousandth of its
predicted value.
To explain this negative result, Bardeen proposed that elec­
trons within the electric field were trapped at the surface in
“ surface states/' and hence were unaffected by the presence
of the field. In order to test this theory, and in an attempt to
find a way to neutralize surface state “ traps," the investigators
performed a new set of experiments. In Nelson's words,
These experiments did yield observed amplification from a field
effect. But more important, in one of the experiments two contacts
were placed quite close together on a germanium crystal. [Figure
6.2] It does not matter just why this particular experiment was per­
formed with the hope of observing the most important result it
yielded. For in the course of the experiment it was observed that
connecting up the A battery increased the current flow in the B
battery circuit. T he device amplified. This was the first indication
of the transistor effect.

F IG U R E 6.2
The Point Contact Transistor7

Experiments designed to make a field-effect amplifier had re­
sulted in the construction of an amplifier working on quite dif­
ferent principles, which came later to be called a “ point con­
tact transistor." Later still, Shockley explained that current
flow increased in the B circuit, as a result of connecting the

m

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

A circuit, because of electron “ holes” flowing from top left
to top right contact. The key concept was “ the flow of minority
carriers in a crystal, holes in n- type germanium.” 8 As Nelson
points out, there still is no really adequate quantitative theory
of the point contact transistor. Nevertheless, experiments
aimed at achieving amplification had produced unexpected ob­
servations indicating that an amplifier might be built on a de­
sign very different from the one originally intended, and the
workings of this new amplifier could be explained in terms of
injected minority carriers.
Shockley then set out to develop a theory of the role of mi­
nority carriers in semiconductor current flow. From this theo­
ry, he was able to design, in a conscious and deliberate way,
the device later called the “ junction transistor,” shown in fig­
ure 6.3.

F IG U R E 6.3
The Junction Transistor9

A junction transistor consists of a germanium or silicon crystal
made up of n, p, and n (or “ emitter,” “ base,” and “ collector”
terminals). The two n regions are separated by a thin p region.
Shockley showed that when voltage increased in the A circuit,
there would be an increase in the flow of electrons between
emitter and collector, the electrons flowing through the central
p region. And he showed that, for appropriate battery biases,
the transistor would amplify, because the induced change in
voltage across the A circuit would produce a larger change
across the B circuit. The invention depended directly on the

180

Reflective Practice in the Science-Based Professions
role of minority carriers, which had grown out of the semiacci­
dental discovery of the point contact transistor.
The structure of inquiry into semiconductors at Bell Labs
can be expressed in a schema, as in figure 6.4. Here we can
discern two kinds of movement mediated by reflection. In the
first, reflection on theory leads to experiment. In the second,
reflection on the unexpected results of experiment leads to the­
ory, or to invention. W hat is striking is that, in the interweav­
ing of theory building and invention, experiment functions
both to confirm or disconfirm hypotheses, to affirm or negate
moves, and to explore phenomena. The discovery of new hy­
potheses occurs repeatedly in a process aimed primarily at de­
sign, and hypothesis-testing experiment leads repeatedly to in­
vention. One should not say that what was learned from the
surface-state experiments made the junction transistor a more
promising alternative but that, before these experiments, the
“ path to an amplifier by way of junctions and minority carriers
just was not clearly perceived.” 10
In the development of the transistor, experiments were
sometimes designed to test hypotheses and existing theories
F IG U R E 6.4
Stages of Development of the Transistor

l8 l

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

were sometimes used to solve known problems. But both hy­
pothesis testing and problem solving were parts of a reflective
conversation with the situation in the course of which hypothe­
ses were newly formed and problems newly framed.

Reflection on S eein g -A s
In the examples just described, there was a crucially important
step, one often attributed to “ creativity” or “ intuition.” In the
case of the gunmetal coloring problem, mechanical engineers
devised a new heating/quenching process and a new hypothesis
about the role of dissolved oxygen in coloring the metal. In the
case of the transistor, several new theories were proposed and
several new devices designed. Faced with unexpected and puz­
zling phenomena, the inquirers made initial descriptions which
guided their further investigations.
W here do such descriptions come from? They are, at least
on some occasions, outcomes of reflections on a perceived simi­
larity, a process which in the previous chapter I called seeingas. The perception of similarity before one can say “ similar
with respect to what,” and the subsequent reflection on it, are
essential both to the art of engineering design and to the art
of scientific investigation.
Thomas Kuhn identifies this process in the development of
theories of physics, for example, and he also finds it in the way
in which a student of physics learns to solve the problems at
the back of the book. Just as the student “ learns to see his prob­
lem as like a problem he has already encountered,” so scientists
“ model one problem solution on another, often with minimum
recourse to symbolic generalizations.” 11 Kuhn’s example is
worth quoting in full.

182

Reflective Practice in the Science-Based Professions
Galileo found that a ball rolling down an incline acquires just
enough velocity to return it to the same vertical height on a second
incline of any slope, and he learned to see that experimental situa­
tion as like the pendulum with a point-mass for a bob. Huyghens
then solved the problem of the center of oscillation of a physical
pendulum by imagining that the extended body of the latter was
composed of Galilean point-pendula, the bonds between which
could be instantaneously released at any point in the swing. After
the bonds were released, the individual point pendula would swing
freely, but their collective center of gravity, like that of Galileo's
pendulum, would rise only to the height from which the center
of gravity of the extended pendulum had begun to fall. Finally,
Daniel Bernoulli, still with no aid from Newton's laws, discovered
how to make the flow of water from an oriface in a storage tank
resemble Huyghens's pendulum. Determine the descent of the
center of gravity of the water in tank and jet during an infinitesi­
mal interval of time. Next imagine that each partical of water af­
terwards moves separately upward to the maximum height obtain­
able with the velocity it possessed at the end of the interval of
descent. T he ascent of the center of gravity of the separate parti­
cles must then equal the descent of the center of gravity of the
water in tank and jet. From that view of the problem, the longsought speed of efflux followed at once.12

In “ The Role of Analogies in Science/' Robert Oppenheimer has told a similar story about the evolution of wave theory.
Physicists had modelled theories of sound waves on existing
theories of waves in liquids, and other physicists subsequently
modelled electromagnetic wave theory on acoustics.13
Kuhn calls such processes “ thinking from exemplars." Once
a new problem is seen to be analogous to a problem previously
solved, then “ both an appropriate formalism and a new way
of attaching its symbolic consequences to nature follow"14—
“ follow," that is, from reflection on the similarity earlier per­
ceived. W hen the two things seen as similar are initially very
different from one another, falling into what are usually consid­

183

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

ered different domains of experience, then seeing-as takes a
form that I call “ generative metaphor.” 15 In this form, seeing-as may play a critical role in invention and design, as the
following example suggests.
Some years ago, a group of product-development researchers
was considering how to improve the performance of a new
paintbrush made with synthetic bristles.16 Compared to the
old natural-bristle brush, the new one delivered paint to a sur­
face in a discontinuous, “ gloppy” way. The researchers had
tried a number of different improvements. They had noticed,
for example, that natural bristles had split ends, whereas the
synthetic bristles did not, and they tried (without significant
improvement resulting) to split the ends of the synthetic bris­
tles. They experimented with bristles of different diameters.
Nothing seemed to help.
Then someone observed, “ You know, a paintbrush is a kind
of pum p!" He pointed out that when a paintbrush is pressed
against a surface, paint is forced through the spaces between
bristles onto the surface. The paint is made to flow through
the “ channels” formed by the bristles when the channels are
deformed by the bending of the brush. He noted that painters
will sometimes vibrate a brush when applying it to a surface,
so as to facilitate the flow of paint.
The researchers tried out the natural and synthetic bristle
brushes, thinking of them as pumps. They noticed that the nat­
ural bristle formed a gradual curve when it was pressed against
a surface, whereas the synthetic brush formed a shape more
nearly an angle. They speculated that this difference might ac­
count for the “ gloppy” performance of the bristle brush. How
then might they make the bending shape of the synthetic
brush into a gentle curve?
This line of thought led them to a variety of inventions. Per­
haps fibers could be varied so as to create greater density in

184

Reflective Practice in the Science-Based Professions
that zone. Perhaps fibers could be bonded together in that
zone. Some of these inventions were reduced to practice and
did, indeed, produce a smoother flow of paint.
Paintbrush as pump is an example of what I mean by a gen­
erative metaphor. One can characterize the metaphor-making
process by saying that the researchers, who had begun by de­
scribing painting in a familiar way, entertained the description
of a different, already-named process (pumping) as an alterna­
tive description of painting; and that in their redescription of
painting, both their perception of the phenomenon and the
previous description of pumping were transformed. W hat
makes the process one of metaphor making, rather than simply
of describing, is that the new putative description already be­
longs to what is initially perceived as a different, albeit familiar,
thing; hence, everything one knows about pumping has the po­
tential of being brought into play in this redescription of paint­
ing. T he researchers were engaged in seeing A as B where A
and B are initially perceived, named, and understood as very
different things— so different that it would ordinarily pass as
a mistake to describe one as the other. It is the restructuring
of the perception of the phenomena A and B which enables
us to call “ metaphor” what we might otherwise have called
“ mistake.”
Not all metaphors are generative. In the researchers’ talk
about the paintbrush problem, for example, they also spoke of
painting as “ masking a surface.” But this metaphor did not
generate perceptions of new features of the paintbrush, nor did
it give rise to a new view of the problem. Paintbrush as pump
was a generative metaphor for the researchers in the sense that
it generated new perceptions, explanations, and inventions.
It is important to note that the researchers were able to see
painting as similar to pumping before they were able to say
similar with respect to what. At first they had only an unar­

*85

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

ticulated perception of similarity which they could express by
doing the painting and inviting others to see it as they did, or
by using terms like “ squeezing” or “ forcing” to convey the
pumplike quality of the action. Only later, in an effort to ac­
count for their earlier perception of the similarity, did they de­
velop an explicit account of the similarity, an account which
later still became part of a general theory of “ pumpoids,” ac­
cording to which they could regard paintbrushes and pumps,
along with washcloths and mops, as instances of a single tech­
nological category.
It would be seriously misleading, then, to say that in making
their generative metaphor, the researchers first “ noticed cer­
tain similarities between paintbrushes and pumps.” For the
making of generative metaphor involves a developmental pro­
cess. It has a life cycle. In the earlier stages of the life cycle,
one notices or feels that A and B are similar, without being
able to say similar with respect to what. Later on, reflecting
on what one perceives, one may come to be able to describe
relations of elements present in a restructured perception of
both A and B which account for the preanalytic detection of
similarity between A and B . Later still, one may construct a
general model for which a redescribed A and a redescribed B
can be identified as instances. The new model is a product of
reflection on the perceived similarity. To read it back onto the
beginning of the process would be to engage in a kind of histor­
ical revisionism.
Thus in technological development as in scientific research,
inquirers can sometimes figure out how to solve unique prob­
lems or make sense of puzzling phenomena by modelling the
unfamiliar on the familiar. Depending on the initial conceptual
proximity or distance of the two things perceived as similar,
the familiar may serve as exemplar or as generative metaphor
for the unfamiliar. In both cases, the inquirer arrives at a new

186

Reflective Practice in the Science-Based Professions
description of the phenomena before him by reflecting-inaction on an earlier perception of similarity. The reflection on
seeing-as, clearly present in Kuhn’s example from the history
of science and in my story of the paintbrush as pump, may also
have been present in the engineers’ invention of the dissolved
oxygen hypothesis or in Bardeen’s invention of the theory of
surface-state electron traps. In these cases, we do not have the
data on which to base such an interpretation. But the idea of
reflection on seeing-as suggests a direction of inquiry into pro­
cesses which tend otherwise to be mystified and dismissed with
the terms “ intuition” or “ creativity,” and it suggests how these
processes might be placed within the framework of reflective
conversation with the situation which I have proposed as a par­
tial account of the arts of engineering design and scientific in­
vestigation.

The Context of Science-Based Practice
I have tried so far to show how reflection-in-action may play
an important part in inquiry which falls well within the narrow
definition of science-based practice. I shall turn now to the in­
teraction between a practitioner’s narrowly technical activity
and the larger social context over which he has little control.
W hen a civil engineer worries over what road to build rather
than how to build it, he comes up against the politics of land
taking and the organized resistance of neighborhoods. Indeed,
he comes up against the whole economic, social, and political
life of the region upon which the road may be imposed. And
when, having designed a road, he begins to convert his design
to reality, he encounters such additional problems as the con­
straints on city budgets, the reactions of organized labor, and

187

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

the political machinations of contractors. The engineer may
deal with these messy factors by placing them beyond the
boundaries of his professional life; he may try to clear a space
for narrowly defined professional work, treating the rest of the
situation as a necessary evil. Or he may accept the intrusions
of the larger situation as a part of his legitimate professional
concern, opening himself to complexity, instability, and uncer­
tainty.
It is in the setting of technical problems and in the imple­
mentation of their solutions that science-based practitioners
meet most directly the dilemma of “ rigor or relevance.” For
neither problem setting nor implementation falls within the
model of Technical Rationality, and in dealing with them an
engineer encounters problematic situations of the sort that
make up the everyday practice of such “ minor” professionals
as planners, social workers, or administrators. Yet he may bring
to these messes the repertoire of a science-based practitioner.
I have had the good luck to meet and work with an engineer
who fits this description. He is by no means typical of the en­
gineering profession. Both the problems on which he has
chosen to concentrate and the style of practice he has devel­
oped set him apart from most of his engineering colleagues.
But just for this reason, his practice is of extraordinary inter­
est, for it reveals how technical problem solving and reflection-in-action may be combined in a professional career
which extends well beyond the boundaries often imposed on
science-based practice.
T h is engineer, w hose nam e is D ean W ilso n , did his appren­
ticeship in a defense system s research laboratory. H e w orked
on radar and on som e o f the early applications o f com puters.
In the 1950s h e becam e a m em ber o f the D ep artm en t o f In­
dustrial E n gin eerin g at th e U niversity o f M ich igan . H e was
am ong those w ho believed that th e m ethods o f system s engi­

188

Reflective Practice in the Science-Based Professions
neering could be transferred fróm the defense industry to the
civilian sector, but he was unusual in that he took an entrepre­
neurial approach to this idea and stayed with it long after other
engineers had dropped it. In the early 1960s, with a few of his
students, he formed an organization which applied systems
analysis to community institutions such as libraries and hospi­
tals, and in the mid-1960s he became a Rockefeller Professor
at the Universidad del Valle, in Cali, Colombia.
In his early work, Wilson developed two powerful guiding
ideas which were to influence all of his later practice. The first
of these was the idea of process-flow modelling; the second,
the Cogwheel Experiment.
As a systems engineer, Wilson had been exposed to inputoutput models of materials handling and communications. In
these models, inputs were seen as flowing through a series of
operations which were described in terms of their effects, their
costs, and their losses. Using formal descriptions of these vari­
ables, one could calculate, for a given objective function, the
optimal process design. For Wilson, however, the idea of pro­
cess flow had been raised to a high level of generality (he re­
membered vividly a lecture in which Kenneth Boulding had
argued that everything in the world could be understood as a
process), and he had developed a complex of theories and tech­
niques associated with process models.
During his time at the defense systems laboratory, Wilson
had learned of the Cogwheel Experiment. This was a meth­
od, developed at R A N D ’s Systems Research Laboratory, to
train teams of soldiers to defend the United States against
enemy air attack. Crews of thirty to forty men ran simulated
air defense experiments, each running about 200 hours, in
which they had to detect and destroy enemy aircraft. Sym­
bols came in from these simulated flights at an average of 300
a minute. Many training methods had been tried, always with

189

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

unsatisfactory results. In the Cogwheel Experiments, howev­
er, the experimental crews kept up a highly effective defense
even when air traffic reached a level three times as great as
actual traffic anywhere in the United States. In this experi­
ment, teams were freed from all standard procedures and
were left free to invent new methods. They were given fre­
quent, rapid, public feedback on team performance. And dur­
ing the experiment, central displays gave each member of the
crew a picture of the organization’s way of responding to the
task. Under these conditions, the teams invented simplified
methods (for example, substituting hand signals, which could
be seen at once by everyone, for complex telephonic equip­
ment); and they learned to use less information, discarding by
the end of the experiment 50 percent of the information they
had needed in the beginning. Wilson treated this experiment
in the broadest possible way, and was fond of quoting a stu­
dent’s observation that every problem should be subjected to
a Cogwheel Experiment.
An example from W ilson’s early work in Colombia illus­
trates his ability to frame the problems of new situations in
terms of these two guiding ideas.
He had been asked to help solve a problem that had arisen
at the teaching hospital in Cali. Doctors there had become
aware of a high rate of error in the administration of drugs to
patients. They blamed the nurses and believed that the solu­
tion was to put all of them through a master’s program, but
they knew that this would be time consuming and costly. W il­
son began by mapping the “ flow process” involved in the con­
version of a doctor’s order to an administered drug. He found
an error rate of 33 percent, compared to an average error rate
of 5 percent in the United States; and by applying the method
of binary search (that is, by measuring error rate at the mid­
point of the process, and then at the midpoints of the remain­

190

Reflective Practice in the Science-Based Professions
ing segments) he found that errors were evenly distributed
throughout the whole process.
He presented these results to a meeting of doctors, nurses,
and orderlies, and asked them for their ideas about ways to re­
duce errors. In the corridor, in full view, he placed a chart
which showed the previous week’s error rate at each stage of
the process. As the staff found ways to reduce errors, the
changes were recorded on the chart. Gradually, over a period
of three months, error rates dropped to the U.S. norm. Wilson
had framed the problem as a flow process and had solved it
by creating the conditions for a Cogwheel Experiment. Under
these conditions, the doctors and their staff— who might have
figured, in a more conventional approach, as part of the social
context of the problem— functioned both as problem solvers
and as implementers of their own solutions. There was no need
to worry about the implementation of an expert solution.
Wilson took a similar approach to the more important and
complex problem which he decided to place at the center of
the rest of his work in Cali, the problem of malnourishment.
Malnourishment in children under the age of six was (and
is) endemic in Colombia. In the region of the Cauca Valley,
around Cali, it is not uncommon to see the swollen bellies, thin
arms, and light hair associated with kwashiorcor and marasmus.
As Wilson began to learn about malnourishment, he discov­
ered that many researchers were already at work on it. There
was consensus about the urgency of the problem, yet there was
little agreement about its definition. Researchers representing
a variety of professions and beliefs were approaching the prob­
lem from a multiplicity of conflicting perspectives.
Some nutritionists, as in Herbert Simon’s “ diet problem,”
sought to relieve malnourishment by choosing the best diet
that could be selected from available foods at current prices.
But Wilson showed that Colombia’s total nutrient production,

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

divided by total population, would yield a daily intake below
minimum protein/calorie requirements. Given a national “ nu­
trient gap/' the malnourishment problem called for more than
the best selection from available foods.
Agronomists who had established agricultural research sta­
tions in Colombia saw the problem as one of agricultural pro­
ductivity. They tried methods of bringing more land under cul­
tivation and studied the introduction of high-lysine com and
strains of high-protein rice and soya. But some village experi­
ments, undertaken by public health physicians, had shown that
when malnourished children were fed increased amounts of
protein and calories they tended to remain malnourished.
These children lost nutrients because of diarrheas caused by
intestinal parasites. Public health specialists therefore thought
in terms of improvement in water quality, replacement of open
sewers with modern plumbing, and family education in the ele­
ments of hygiene.
Some economists thought differently. They traced poor sani­
tation and low-protein diets to a single cause, poverty. Poor
families must become more productive in order to raise their
income levels to the point where malnourishment-reducing
strategies would become economically feasible. These econo­
mists thought in terms of training, creation of village indus­
tries, and relocation of workers to places of high employment.
Some of them argued that the roots of malnourishment were
in the low rate of national economic growth and could only
be removed by more effective policies for economic develop­
ment.
Other observers noted that in the Cauca Valley, the very
fertile lowlands consisted of large plantations whose owners
grew sugarcane and cattle for export, while on the eroding
mountainsides the peasants eked out a bare living from their
small farms. Colombia needed a redistribution of land and

192

Reflective Practice in the Science-Based Professions
wealth. In a country where approximately 5 percent of the pop­
ulation consumed some 80 percent of the agricultural produc­
tion (and almost all of the domestic meat), and where the best
land was used for export, malnourishment was a problem of
political economy. The more radical members of this group de­
spaired of conventional political solutions. They looked to revo­
lution, pointing to Castro’s Cuba as a shining exception to the
general rule of malnourishment in Latin America.
Researchers who took a historical perspective saw that a pro­
tein gap at the national level was a recent phenomenon.
Twenty years before, Colombia’s total agricultural production
would have been sufficient, had it been distributed, to nourish
the whole population. But in twenty years population had
grown much faster than agricultural production. T he national
protein gap had resulted from the success of public health in­
terventions, especially from the W orld Health Organization’s
near-eradication of malaria in the 1950s. The malnourishment
problem was a problem of population control.
In this Rashomon of problem settings, each profession
framed the problem according to its expertise, its ideology, and
its interests.
As a systems engineer, W ilson’s impulse was to reconcile the
conflicting perspectives by including the many different factors
they named within a larger system, a flow process whose output
was the nutritional status of children. He envisaged a system
of nutrient flows which began in the fields and ended in the
body of the child. He wanted to devise a method which would
enable him to estimate the losses of nutrients incurred at each
stage of the process. By ascertaining the “ nutrient gap” at each
stage (as he had measured the error rate at each stage of the
drug-administration process), he would be able to learn the
points at which interventions would be most likely to reduce
malnourishment.

m

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

A simplified version of this “ nutrient flow model” is shown
in figure 6.5.

Wilson intended to use models of this kind to calculate nu­
trient gaps for whole regions, villages, and individual house­
holds. He would begin at the community level, determining,
as he put it, “ what are the practical methods of closing the
nutrient gap and, of these, which combination is the least
costly within a time constraint of a few years?” 17 He organized
a project team, drawing on his Colombian and North Ameri­
can students and colleagues, and got support to develop and
test his nutrient flow model in six communities in the Cauca
Valley. But the methodological problems proved formidable.
There were serious problems in the choice of measures of malnourishment, in the calculation of nutrient gaps, and even in
the analysis of such fundamental ideas as “ nutrient distribu­
tion” and “ household.” In some villages, for example, children
ate most of their meals not in their own houses but in informal
daycare settings where they stayed while their parents worked
in the field. Determination of nutrient gaps at the household
level depended on reliable measures of consumption which
were extraordinarily difficult to obtain, if only because families
tended to raise their levels of consumption to their image of
the observer’s standards.

*94

Reflective Practice in the Science-Based Professions
The full range of methodological problems began to make
it seem doubtful that it would be possible, in a single model,
to encompass all of the variables involved in nutrient flow. At
the same time, Wilson became intensely aware of difficulties
in implementing the model. W ho would carry out the commu­
nity-level interventions? If outside professionals did so, they
would reinforce the pattern of passive dependence on outsiders
which was so much a part of the community predicament.
There were many examples of externally motivated and engi­
neered interventions which had failed in the later stages of im­
plementation. Moreover, there seemed to be no reliable tech­
nique of intervention which could be generalized across all
communities. Increasingly, Wilson began to conceive of the
nutrient flow model not as a general technique of diagnosis for
use by outside experts but as a framework of analysis with
which community residents could set and solve their own prob­
lems of malnourishment.
An opportunity to act on this idea arose when Wilson and
his colleagues were invited to participate in an educational proj­
ect in the small village of Buenos Aires, which lay in the moun­
tains some two hours away by jeep from Cali. A physician who
had grown up in this village was a colleague of W ilson’s at the
Valle medical school. He had been working with the children
of local peasants who were living at a Hogar, a boarding school
and farm located just outside the village. This Hogar was one
of some two hundred that had been established throughout
Colombia to provide secondary education for children from
rural villages, who would otherwise have no chance of going
beyond the primary grades. The children— about a hundred
of them, between the ages of thirteen and nineteen— worked
a small farm, contributing to their own subsistence, and re­
ceived instruction in the usual secondary-school subjects. T o
Wilson, the Hogar at Buenos Aires offered the opportunity he

*95

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

had been seeking. Over the next several years, the village of
Buenos Aires became the setting in which he taught systems
engineering to the children of peasants.
Wilson and a former Peace Corps volunteer, Kip Gkroad,
began to spend a great deal of time at the Hogar, getting to
know the children and the staff. It had been decided that they
would meet with the students every Wednesday afternoon,
when the regular school was not in session.
As they puzzled over finding a good way to introduce the
problem of malnourishment, the nutrient flow model, and the
idea of experiment, it occured to Wilson that a colony of labo­
ratory rats, which had been used to demonstrate the effects
of different diets, might intrigue the children. The rat cages
were arranged in the form of a matrix, so that it was possible,
reading from the upper left to the lower right-hand corner, to
see dramatic differences in the size and behavior of the rats
as a function of their diet. The display never failed to interest
visitors, and it was decided to do something similar at Buenos
Aires.
On the first Wednesday, the staff brought out nine rats and
told the students, “ W e ’d like you to keep these rats, and of
course it will be necessary to feed them. W hat do you suggest?”
The students disagreed about the best diet for the rats.
There were three main proposals: yuca and platano (two popu­
lar local foods containing no protein), the same foods the stu­
dents were eating in the Hogar, and a standard laboratory diet
for rats. Wilson and Ekroad suggested, “ Let’s divide the rats
into three groups of three rats each, and feed each a different
diet. Then we can see if they look any different.”
The students ran the experiment. They were responsible for
feeding and caring for the rats and for weighing them once
a week, all of which they did with enthusiasm. After one week,

196

Reflective Practice in the Science-Based Professions
the first results were astonishing to the students. The groups
on the Hogar diet and on the laboratory diet had gained weight
considerably, while the groups on the yuca and platano diet
had actually lost weight. After four weeks of this, students be­
came concerned that “ these rats were going to die,” and a gen­
eral discussion took place. It was decided to switch the rats’
diets and then observe and plot the results. The curves actually
crossed.
From this early experiment, the group moved to more com­
plex experiments with diets for rats (one of these led to an in­
quiry into the apparently magical properties of vitamins) and
then to explorations of malnourishment in human beings.
Shortly after the first experiment, the students were shown
pictures of a group of children, all aged seven or eight. They
were asked, “ W hat do you see?”
The students noticed that some were small and some were
big, but they noticed other things as well. “ T he little ones look
sad,” they said. “ They do not have any muscles.” Staff did not
use the word “ malnourishment,” nor did they ask what the
children in the picture might be eating. They hoped to elicit
such responses spontaneously, as a test of the transfer of learn­
ing (from rats to people) that might already have taken place.
But no such responses were forthcoming.
Some of the students, those who lived near enough to the
Hogar to make the trip, made visits home once a month. After
the first few weeks, these students were asked to bring back
information about the members of their households, including
name, sex, age, and relationship, and they were asked to weigh
their brothers and sisters. Upon their return, the data were
plotted on a scatter graph. Staff analyzed these data indepen­
dently, and found a number of examples of mild and serious
malnourishment, but the students themselves had few com­

*97

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

ments about the data. They did not yet have concepts suffi­
cient for such analysis.
Once the data of weight for age were plotted, the students
were told they could now tell the relative nutritional status of
their brothers and sisters, but they could not yet tell the abso­
lute levels of malnourishment. They were then asked what the
next step should be. Their answer was that they should find
out what their families were eating. W hen they were asked
how to do this, they first said, “ Go ask our mothers,” and then,
“ G o weigh the food/' quickly identifying the two principal
methods used in the diagnostic procedure.
One of the students, Aida, wrote these comments about her
experiences in these early sessions:
I became completely convinced that platano and yuca are not as
good foods as I considered them. They do not contain all the ele­
ments necessary for growing and developing normally.. . . I, Aida,
see nothing funny, thanks to this experiment, since it makes us
realize what good nourishment is and of what it consists.
In the class, we received some instructions on measuring and
weighing children under 5 years old and, as with the rats, the age
and size of the children tells us, more or less, if they are malnour­
ished or n o t . . . Before going to our houses to weigh our younger
brothers and sisters, we practiced on children in the homes near
the school with some girls who taught us to weigh children.
Then we went to our homes to weigh the younger children. W e
weighed many children and brought back a great quantity of data
that shows the bad malnourishment state.
This system of teaching appears to be good to me. I like this kind
because it is practical. Because what one does is difficult to forget.
It is easier to forget when something is only said.
I have learned that one must analyze his own problems and then
look for the solution to devise his own way of overcoming, and
not to expect others to do it for us.

198

Reflective Practice in the Science-Based Professions
I am still waiting since this course began to learn how we are going
to fight the malnourishment that affects so much our country.18

W hen the students were asked what “ problems” they had
found at home, they were puzzled. They could identify no
problems— finding it odd, perhaps, to describe as a “ problem”
what they observed routinely in their surroundings. They did,
however, become interested in the diets of siblings, and this
led later on to questions about the cultivation and consumption
of higher-protein foods— notably soya. W ith this, over several
months, the students turned to the problems of agricultural
productivity. Thinking of experiments they might carry out at
their own farm at the Hogar, they debated, as they had become
used to doing, over methods for increasing productivity, and
they tried to resolve their disagreements by conducting an ex­
periment.
Their first such experiment consisted in testing natural ver­
sus synthetic fertilizer, and no fertilizer at all, on three patches
of com planted on a hill. One of the students at the Hogar
explained to a visitor that this was “ the same as the rat experi­
ment,” and when the visitor did not immediately see the point,
she said, “ C an’t you see? It’s the same as the rat feeding, only
here we’re feeding plants instead of rats!”
But what the students found was that the tallest corn grew
in none of the three patches, but at the bottom of the hill
where the soil had washed down. W hen they saw this, their
attention shifted from fertilizer to erosion of the soil, a problem
that plagued all of the farmers who tried to cultivate the red
claylike soil of the hills around the Cauca Valley. Wilson and
Ekroad then began some instruction in soil erosion and its con­
trol, following which the students undertook a series of experi­
ments. W hen it came to the problem of measuring the rate
of erosion, one of the students invented a simple but elegant

-*99

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

device. A hollow cylinder was planted in the ground at the bot­
tom of the hill, and the height of the soil that accumulated
in the cylinder showed the rate of erosion.
Meanwhile, the fathers of the children at the Hogar became
increasingly curious about the education the children were re­
ceiving. These gaunt, dignified men had travelled by burro
from village to village, collecting money to make up their
matching share of the costs of the Hogar, and they did not
take the school for granted. They observed the children’s work
and discussed it among themselves. Several of them decided
to plant soya at their own farms. Others introduced experi­
ments in irrigation and erosion control.
The lessons that Aida and other children had drawn from
the program began to make themselves felt in other ways as
well. W hen the mayor of Buenos Aires received money from
the municipality and announced that it would be used to pave
some roads, a group of the children decided to confront him.
They asked why the money should be used to build roads when
none of the villagers owned a car, and why it should not be
used to improve the quality of the water which they had mea­
sured and found badly polluted. The mayor, temporarily non­
plussed, eventually decided to go along with the children's sug­
gestion. But when the episode came to the attention of the
local coffee planters who helped to support the Hogar, they
had a less benign reaction. The Hogar, as they saw it, had been
designed to make the children into good workers, not to make
them challenge the established order. They dropped their sup­
port, but because the Hogar had other sources of support it
was able, nonetheless, to survive.
In all of their teaching in the Buenos Aires project, Wilson
and Ekroad developed a mode of practice which they thought
a great deal about but could only partially articulate. (They al­
ways trusted their practice more than their articulations of it.)
200

Reflective Practice in the Science-Based Professions
The early rat-feeding experiment became an exemplar for
them* They sought out concrete, dramatic contexts which
would capture the students’ attention and would also serve as
simulation models for human nutrition. They tried to create
situations in which students could discover relationships— for
example, relationships between diet and age-weight ratio— for
themselves. Similarly, the students were led to experience the
experimental method before any explicit mention of its princi­
ples was made, and were given a great deal of control over
events in the classroom and therefore over their own learning.
Wilson and Ekroad designed experiments to test the students’
hypotheses but also held themselves ready to respond to happy
accidents, such as the discovery of highest corn growth at the
bottom of the hill.
W hat the students seem to be learning was, as Aida said,
to take initiative in solving problems for themselves, to be skep­
tical of outside authority, to settle disagreements by experi­
ment. But they may have been learning more than this. Some
students were able to understand the fertilizer experiments as
versions of the rat-feeding ones, and some turned their atten­
tion to soil erosion when they saw that plants grew best at the
bottom of the hill. These students, at any rate, seemed to be
learning to model the unfamiliar on the familiar and to reframe
their questions around the changes which resulted unexpect­
edly from their actions.
Something similar had been happening in W ilson’s work on
malnourishment. He had begun with the image of a nutrient
flow model that would organize all of the variables recognized
by the conflicting research perspectives on malnourishment,
and he had intended that outside experts would use that model
to diagnose and cure the malnourishment problems of particu­
lar communities. Nevertheless, as he became more fully aware
of the methodological difficulties in constructing the model
201

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

and of the dilemmas of implementing it, he was led to restruc­
ture his image of intervention. It would not be outside experts
but community members themselves who would use the nutri­
ent flow model idea to diagnose their own malnourishment
problems and design their own interventions. W ith this
change, community learning became an objective equal in im­
portance to the reduction of malnourishment. And as a conse­
quence, community members— who might have figured as
parts of the social context of technical practice— became prob­
lem-solving agents. As Wilson sought to create at the Hogar
the conditions for a Cogwheel Experiment on malnourish­
ment, he had to frame and reflect on a new problem, that of
involving and guiding the community members he wished to
adopt as co-inquirers. His practice as a systems engineer
merged with his practice as a teacher.
In some respects, the Buenos Aires project produced ambig­
uous results. Although it led to a number of village-level experi­
ments on the production and consumption of soya, there were
no dramatic effects on the local malnourishment rate, at least
in the first few years of the project’s life. Indeed, it was not
clear what future effects on malnourishment would be, for
many of the children living at the Hogar (about 50 percent,
according to one study) would probably move after graduation
to one of the nearby cities. But the project did capture the
imagination of those who came in contact with it. The Colom­
bian organization that sponsored the Hogares became inter­
ested in the Buenos Aires experiment and took steps to repro­
duce it in other settings. Professional observers of the project
were excited by its use of education in experimental method
as a response to community-level malnourishment.
The Buenos Aires project reveals W ilson’s unusual way of
being an engineer and thereby epitomizes the main themes of
this chapter. The kind of reflection-in-action which engineers
202

Reflective Practice in the Science-Based Professions
sometimes bring to engineering design, and scientists to scien­
tific investigation, Wilson has brought to a practice in which
technical analysis and social intervention are joined together.
As scientists and engineers learn to model unfamiliar problems
on familiar ones and build new theory by reflecting on per­
ceived but as yet unarticulated similarities, so Wilson has
evolved a repertoire of powerful exemplars on which he draws
to make sense of unique and complex socio-technical situa­
tions. He has not expunged technical problem solving from his
practice but has embedded it in relevant and, in its own way,
rigorous reflection-in-action.

203

7
Town Planning:
Limits to
Reflection- in- Action

The Evolving Context of Planning Practice
Town planning has a charter membership in Glazer’s society
of minor professions. The institutional context of planning
practice is notoriously unstable and there are many contending
views of the profession, each of which carries a different image
of the planning role and a different picture of the body of use­
ful knowledge. A t the present time, for example, planners func­
tion variously as designers, plan makers, critics, advocates of
special interests, regulators, managers, evaluators, and interme­
diaries. In planning as in other professions, each role tends to
be associated with characteristic values, strategies, techniques,
and bodies of relevant information. But in the planning profes-

204

Town Planning: Limits to Reflection-in-Action
sion, images of role have evolved significantly in relatively brief
periods of time. The profession, which came into being around
the turn of the century, moved in succeeding decades through
different ideas in good currency about planning theory and
practice, partly in response to changes in context shaped by
planners themselves. The history of the evolution of planning
roles can be understood as a global conversation between the
planning profession and its situation.
W ith the development of the city planning movement in
the early years of this century, planners first gained visibility,
power, and professional status. The growth of comprehensive
and master planning and the widespread establishment of local
planning commissions in the United States paralleled the for­
mation of the coalition supportive of town planning in Brit­
ain.1 Following World W ar II, probably as a result of military
and economic planning in wartime America, the idea of central
planning extended its scope from comprehensive and master
planning for towns to such fields as urban renewal, urban and
regional transportation, health services, public education, men­
tal health, and criminal justice.
In these domains, among many others, the centralist planner
operated from the base of institutions created and legitimized
through legislation brought into being by a coalition of political
forces. The planner framed his role at the center of a system
for which he planned, in relation to agencies which would im­
plement his plans and clienteles who would benefit from them.
His system of knowledge-in-practice dealt with the framing of
objectives and goals, the imagining of a desirable future, the
description of baseline conditions, the identification of alterna­
tive strategies of action, the description of constraints to be
circumvented or removed, the mapping of the system to be
influenced, and the prediction of the consequences of action.
Later, planners also came to be concerned with the feasibility

205

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

of implementing plans and the political problems of “ selling”
them.
Through the mid-1960s, centralist planning proceeded in
this mode. Its operations were based on two main assumptions:
1.

2.

There is a working consensus about the content of the public
interest, sufficient for the setting of planning goals and objec­
tives, and
There is a system of knowledge adequate for the conduct of
central planning.

It does not matter that these assumptions may never have been
true. They were widely believed to be true, and they set the
terms of reference for the planning profession. But by the mid1960s, both assumptions were in trouble.
The public at large, and planners themselves, were becom­
ing increasingly aware of the counterintuitive consequences,
the harmful side effects and the unwanted by-products of im­
plemented plans. Plans designed to solve problems either failed
to solve them or created problems worse than the problems
they had been designed to solve. Some of the phenomena plan­
ners were most anxious to influence— poverty, crime, urban
congestion and decay— seemed tenaciously resistant to inter­
vention. The most broadly believed predictions (those relating
to school enrollment, for example) turned out to be mistaken.
Attempts to build formal, quantitative models of social phe­
nomena foundered in complexity. Attempts to conduct social
experiments were confounded by unanticipated and uncontrol­
lable changes in the experimental context. Planners were found
sometimes deliberately, sometimes unintentionally, to be serv­
ing interests incongruent with their espoused values. Social
critics and angry political pressure groups demonstrated that
plans had meanings and consequences well beyond those envis­
aged by urban planners. And as the perceived scope and com­

206

Town Planning: Limits to Reflection-in-Action
plexity of planning increased, planners found that their tech­
niques and models were inadequate to the tasks of analysis, di­
agnosis, and prediction. Planning “ problems” came to seem
more like dilemmas made up of conflicts of values, interests,
and ideologies unresolvable by recourse to the facts.
By the mid-1960s, the apparent consensus about the content
of the public interest— perhaps even about the feasibility of
establishing such a consensus— had faded away. As the harmful
consequences of centralist planning and governmental action
were discovered, special interest groups formed around issues
of injustice, hazard, and neglect. By the late 1970s, it was clear
that there was no national consensus about the public interest.
There was rather a field of special interests: minority groups,
women’s groups, environmentalists, consumers’ groups, advo­
cates of health and safety at work, the handicapped, the protag­
onists of special education and basic education, neighborhood
conservationists, advocates for neighborhood schools, energy
conservationists, advocates of zero population growth, advo­
cates for and antagonists of abortion, moral and religious fun­
damentalists, advocates for guns or gun control, advocates for
crime prevention, and advocates for de-institutionalization of
prisons and mental hospitals. These constituencies had learned
to organize themselves, enter into public debate, and take po­
litical action in order to bring their concerns to legislative and
judicial reality.
In some cases, special interest groups took positions which
were in direct and explicit conflict with one another. In other
cases, conflicts of interest became clear only as the success of
one movement led to consequences contrary to the interests
of another. In still other cases, conflict became evident as the
different movements found themselves competing in hard
times for scarce resources.
Throughout the 1960s, a new breed of social planners began
207

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

to criticize established institutions because they rode rough­
shod over the less powerful. Herbert Gans, Jane Jacobs, Francis
Piven, and Mark Fried, among other students of urban renew­
al, showed how planners acting ostensibly in the public interest
actually served the interests of real estate developers and large
corporations by displacing the poor and ethnic minorities.2
The social critics and advocate planners operated in a social
field made up of the constituents they sought to protect, the
established institutions they fought, the media they tried to
influence, the courts through which they often sought redress
of grievances, and the legislatures through which they tried to
shape laws that would regulate the behavior of established in­
terests. Their knowledge-in-practice had to do with issues such
as these: expressing the interests of the dispossessed, or empow­
ering the dispossessed to express their own interests; demystify­
ing the professional personas of the centralist planners, show­
ing up their intended or unintended alliance with established
interests; explaining how the actions of government and busi­
ness affect the less powerful; formulating policies and programs
to protect the less powerful and identifying the practices of
established interest groups which needed most to be watched
and controlled; figuring out how to gain visibility and political
voice for the dispossessed; building connections to legislators,
regulators, and executive agencies.
As these critics, advocates, and organizers were able to bring
their ideas into good currency, they succeeded in influencing
the legislative process either to regulate the actions of estab­
lished institutions or to establish programs of service or income
support for special interest groups. As a partial consequence
of their success, the present social context of planning has be­
come a field of institutions organized around contending inter­
ests. Regulatory systems have been established by law to moni­
tor and control the actions of agencies such as businesses,

208

Town Planning: Limits to Reflection-in-Action
schools, hospitals, universities, and real estate developers. T he
courts play a large and increasing role as adjudicators of doubt­
ful cases, interpreters of the law, dispensers of sanctions for vio­
lation of the law, and sometimes as direct monitors or manag­
ers of systems in default.
W ithin these institutional fields, planners no longer follow
the centralist planning model. They practice in relation to a
growing variety of special interest groups and regulatory sys­
tems, and they have developed a variety of new or modified
roles. They may function as spokesmen, strategists, or technical
staff for parties to the regulatory process. They may perform
watchdog functions, reviewing, for example, the environmen­
tal impact statements of developers or the affirmative action
plans of government agencies. They may position themselves
in the neutral space between regulators and regulated, func­
tioning as mediators who convene interested parties, helping
them to understand one another’s position, to identify com­
mon interests, or to fashion an acceptable compromise.
In these intermediary roles, more like the traditional roles
of the lawyer than the sometime centralist planner, know­
ledge must be developed and brought to bear on issues such
as these: understanding the field of actors and interests with
its potentials for satisfaction, frustration, mutual constraint or
mutual enhancement; formulating issue-specific targets for
negotiation, mediation, or inquiry; creating conditions for ef­
fective control or evasion of control, for successful negotia­
tion, or for productive inquiry; designing intermediary inter­
ventions and assessing their effectiveness; maintaining the
conditions of credibility and legitimacy on which the inter­
mediary roles depend.
In the case that follows, I shall consider an example of this
most recent form of planning practice, showing how one inter­
mediary planner has evolved knowing-in-practice which en­

209

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

ables him to address issues such as those listed above. In this
case study, however, I shall explore several more general fea­
tures of professional knowledge.3
A professional role places skeletal demands on a practition­
er’s behavior, but within these constraints, each individual de­
velops his own way of framing his role. W hether he chooses
his role frame from the profession’s repertoire, or fashions it
for himself, his professional knowledge takes on the character
of a system. The problems he sets, the strategies he employs,
the facts he treats as relevant, and his interpersonal theories
of action are bound up with his way of framing his role. In the
case that follows, I shall describe such a system of knowing-in­
practice.
Further, a system of this sort tends to be self-reinforcing.
Depending on the kind of role frame he has constructed and
on the kind of interpersonal theory of action he has evolved,
a practitioner’s reflection-in-action may be more or less limited
in scope and depth. In the case that follows, I shall try to show
how limits to reflection-in-action are set and maintained.

Some of What One Planner Knows
The individual whose practice we will be examining in this
chapter is a town planner concerned primarily with the physi­
cal development of the town he serves. Yet he makes no com­
prehensive plans and prepares no designs for neighborhoods
or regions. He has defined his job as one of reviewing proposals
submitted by private developers to local regulatory bodies, and
has positioned himself as an intermediary between these two
parties. He seeks, by advising and negotiating with developers,
210

Town Planning: Limits to Reflection-in-Action
to influence the direction and quality of physical development
in the town. Substituting these functions for the more tradi­
tional preparation of plans, he plans by proxy.
Given his way of framing his role in the town and his image
of the dilemmas associated with that role, the planner has
learned to treat his practice as a balancing act in which he tries
continually to advise and negotiate with developers while at
the same time preserving his credibility with all the parties on
whom his role depends.
In the following protocol, a transcript of a videotape of one
of the meetings recorded in the planner's office, a developer
presents drawings and plans for remodelling an apartment
building which he and his uncle own in the town. Under the
town's development bylaws, the planner must review such
plans before submitting them to the Zoning Board of Appeals
which has authority to grant or withhold variances.
As the tape begins, the planner rolls up his sleeves, consults
his notes, and leans across the table to look at the developer
and his architect.

ril give you a review here. I think we ought to base
some of the discussion we had a couple of weeks ago.
You've got plans, and what I suggested is that we
go over the zoning bylaw to see exactly how they con­
form. The building plans, the structure itself, is no
problem, but I think that within the zoning bylaws
we've got to have some areas that we have to look
at very closely in the site plan. Okay? Now, uh, and
as far as the building is concerned, I think we can
work out the details with the building inspector
about the code requirements.
Right
a r c h it e c t :
. . . which you work with all the time anyway . . .
plan n er:

PLANNER:

2 11

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

The planner has defined the meeting's purpose, which is to
review the developer's plans to see “ exactly how they conform"
to the zoning bylaw. He divides the plan into two parts, one
that he finds acceptable (“ the structure itself") and one that
he finds problematic (“ the site plan"). From here on, he will
review elements of the site plan which he has listed for com­
ment.
First, however, he checks to see whether the developer is
familiar with the bylaws.
. . . but, Tom , have you had a chance to look at the
development bylaws?
(Developer looks at architect.)
W ell, I’ve gone through it roughly.
a r c h it e c t :
W h y don’t we look at the lot?
plan n er:
d e v e l o p e r : W e ’ve blown the plans up quite a bit for you . . .
They were real small, you couldn’t see ’em.
a r c h it e c t :
planner:

Now the planner zones in on the first item on his list, the ques­
tion of lot size.
p:

d:
p:

212

All right, now. Under the new apartment controls in our
town, before the new bylaw enactor, you had to have 20,000
square feet of lot area; you had only 14,341. As you know,
it’s apparently impossible to get any more.
Uh-hum.
N o w , what you wanna do is add a couple apartment units
to this building. That is gonna require a variance . .. because
. . . you are . . . adding to a multi-family building in an apart­
ment zone where the lots aren’t large enough. So you’re
gonna need a variance on lot size.. . . A t the same time, you’ll
need a special permit because you are dealing with an apart­
ment structure, but that can be handled. As I look at it, with­
out seeing a more detailed site plan (but that can be put to­
gether eventually), the only variance you need is on lot area.
Everything else is all right.

Town Planning: Limits to Reflection-in-Action
The developer, still preoccupied with the visibility of his plans
(as though that might remove the difficulty), questions
whether he is really in violation of the bylaw.
d:

1 don't know. I think I have something a little bit larger for
us to look at. I don't know that we violate too much of the
thing, especially if we get involved in taking down that little
thing up front there.

The planner explains how the developer may be able to justify
a variance on lot size, ignoring the latter's hint that there may
be no need for it.
p:
d:

p:

Obviously you have no problems with the floor area.
W e don't.
Y ou have no problem with land area per dwelling unit, and
when you go to the Zoning Board of Appeals, obviously that's
gonna be one thing you want to play out. Even though you
don't have the 20,000 square feet of land, you're not even
approaching the zoning limit, because you're dealing with ex­
isting buildings.

W ithout pausing to sound out the developer's reaction to
these suggestions, the planner goes on to point out additional
requirements in the bylaw.
p:

d:
p:

The new zoning bylaw does have two open-space require­
ments, and they're slightly different from other bylaws you
may have worked with. You must have a landscaped area,
which is ten percent of the gross floor area of the buildings
on the lot, not ten percent of the lot area, unless you have
a usable open-space area of 25 percent of the building. Now
look closely at the definitions of the bylaw: W h at constitutes
landscape? W hat constitutes usable?
Uh-hum.
Essentially, the section of your landscaped area can be met
perhaps here, or along part of the site.

213

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

The developer checks out what is included under the term
“ usable open space/'
d:
a:
d:
p:
a:
d:
p:

W hen they say usable, are they referring to space that's been
paved for parking?
N o.
N o, so that's over and above that,
So its unpaved.
Unpaved.
Unpaved.
Unpaved.

W ith this chorus of “ unpaved” s confirming the existence of
the problem, the architect moves to suggest how the problem
could be solved:
a:

Y ou take that door down, that's how you could solve that
very easily.

But the developer does not show much interest in this idea.
His attention has shifted to a new consideration which leads
him to depart from the planner's carefully prepared list of pos­
sible violations of the bylaw:
d:

214

Y ou know, when I went back after our last meeting I dis­
cussed with my uncle, who is the other owner of the building.
He said something and he made a lot of sense. W ell, look,
he said, if we've got to take down the store, he said, and if
we violate (and it appears to me that the biggest thing is the
20,000 flipper rule that we don't violate too badly from what
I can see— but you're the planner, you know better than I).
If we're violating only that anyway, he says, why don't we
ask for a couple more apartments? W hy are we settling for
eleven? Because then we'd be able to do other things, even
with maybe keeping the same structure. And I have no an­
swer for that.

Town Planning: Limits to Reflection-in-Action
If there is only one variance needed on lot size, what about
the possibility of increasing the number of apartments on the
lot? T o which the planner responds:
p:
d:
p:
d:
a:
p:

d:
p:

Now, Fm not going to say yes or no.
All rig h t.
Because I think there's only so much you can put on this land.
Right.
Legally.
That's the criterion. Now, I don't know if it's nine, ten, elev­
en, twenty, or fifty. But 1do know that as long as you're deal­
ing with existing buildings, you know, 14,000 square feet of
land is not, I think, going to be a serious problem. But I'm
not the Zoning Board of Appeals. That's their decision. If
you then begin to overbuild on the land, you have to have
variances for open space.
W e don't want that.
Right. Now all you have to worry about is one variance.

Having disposed of the developer's question, the planner pro­
ceeds to the next item on his list:
p:

d:

The other thing I think you want to look at very carefully
is the article on parking. The parking requirements are
slightly different than they used to be. In an apartment
house, you have to have one parking space for each efficiency,
one and a half for each two-bedroom, two for each three- or
four-bedroom. I'm not sure exactly how much parking you
have provided here now.
Right, I think we have seventeen there.

But the parking requirement is complicated by two further pro­
visions of the bylaw:
p:

Also in the parking section, I want you to look at Section
812, there are setback requirements for parking areas. W e

215

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

a:
p:

a:

p:

d:

want to keep them off the lot line. Now that's gonna limit
your area a little bit.
Y ou mean side and rear.
Once again, I'm just urging you to lay it out. Now, this is
just a simple layout here. There are other ways, I'm sure, to
do it.
Oh, every one that you eliminate, the better off you are,
there's no question about it. Now, if it comes down to the
20,000 square feet variance, and even the parking variance,
that's still not too bad.
Okay, but it's gonna take some layouts to determine what
you can and can't do. These parking spaces were thrown in
without looking at the new ratios. Because we looked at them
very carefully, and I think we found that you have four extra
spaces.
Yes.

The planner now turns to his concluding piece of advice:
p:

d:
p:
d:
p:

d:
p:

W hen you go down the road and actually apply for the vari­
ance and go to the public hearing, make sure you're prepared
to answer these questions. Now, uh, I don't want to prejudge,
but the one question they're going to ask is, what hardship
do you have with this particular piece of property? W hy do
you need the variance to do what you want to do?
W ell, based on what I told you, is that a sufficient hardship?
A s I say, I don't prejudge.
N o.
There are certainly economic considerations. Generally, you
know, you've got a situation where you've owned a piece of
property for a long time. In order to do something in these
times when costs are different, you need to increase the in­
come potential of the building. . . .
Exactly.
But they're gonna want to know specifics, and I think that's
the kind of thinking you ought to work on. O.K.?

And here the architect raises a new possibility:

216

Town Planning: Limits to Reflection-in-Action
a:

p:

W ith regard to the fact that he has to go for a variance any­
way, what's the possibility of going for a new building?
I think then you're gonna run into difficulties, because you're
asking for a new variance. Now, if you're asking for a new
building to replace the eight units that you have there, then
I seriously doubt that a variance will be granted. The town
has made it very clear that in order to build new apartments
you've got to have 20,000 square feet of land. And I know
of no case where they've granted a variance for a new build­
ing on a lot under 20,000 square feet.

In the remaining few minutes of the meeting, the developer
agrees that he had "pretty much ruled out going that route."
What happens in the protocol Most of the planner's behav­
ior in this meeting can be understood as an attempt to follow
rigorously an agenda which he establishes at the outset: to re­
view the developer's plans in order to see exactly how they con­
form to the zoning bylaw. Hence the planner takes up, in turn,
the factors of lot size, open space, and parking. T he developer
and his architect respond by questioning the meanings of such
terms as "open space," or by suggesting how the various prob­
lems might be solved. On two separate occasions, however, the
developer or his architect makes a proposal and the planner
responds to it in a way that suggests a kind of bargaining. Early
in the meeting, the developer quotes his uncle's suggestion that
as long as they need a variance because of the "20,000 feet
flipper rule," why shouldn't they go for a couple more apart­
ments? The planner responds with "Now, I'm not going to say
yes or no . . .
but he goes on to spell out the factors that
will govern the board's response, all the while setting limits to
his own authority to give such an answer ("I'm not the Zoning
Board of Appeals"). A t the very end of the protocol the archi­
tect raises the question of going for a new building, and here
the planner answers firmly, "I know of no case where they've
217

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

granted a variance for a new building on a lot under 20,000
square feet/'
Elsewhere the planner prepares the developer for a future
meeting with the Zoning Board of Appeals, rather as though
he were preparing a student for an exam. He signals questions
to be asked, answers that will be acceptable, and homework
to be done. (“ . . . they're going to ask what hardship do you
have . . . ? W hy do you need the variance to do what you want
to do? . . . think about that.") At the same time, he tries to
avoid giving the impression that he can make such decisions
himself. (“ As I say, I don't prejudge.")
Thus the planner undertakes three main tasks. As he reviews
the plans and notes possible violations of the zoning bylaw, he
advises the developer about the need for variances. He prepares
him for the examination he can expect when he puts his case
before the Zoning Board of Appeals. And he bargains with the
developer, responding guardedly to proposals the developer
uses, apparently to discover how much he will be allowed to
get away with.
The planner's conduct of his meeting with the developer can
be understood in terms of his attempt to solve problems he
has framed around these three main tasks.
In his review of the plans, he is meticulous. He takes pains
to document his evaluations (“ Don't forget these items . . .
W hen you work on the site plan, I'll give you a copy of this
if you want"). A t the same time, he continually exhibits a con­
cern with the limits of his own authority, announcing fre­
quently that he can only anticipate the board's actions and can
make no decisions by himself. He behaves, in other words, as
though he must conduct a rigorous preliminary review of plans
which is in constant danger of being misconstrued as final.
Occasionally he calls attention to a possible violation of the
bylaw, communicating information he appears to think the de­

218

Town Planning: Limits to Reflection-in-Action
veloper may regard as negative. At each such point, he behaves
as though he wishes to avoid discouraging the developer:
As I look at it, without seeing a more detailed site plan (but that
can be put together eventually), the only variance you need is on
lot area.

Here he stresses that only one variance will be necessary, point­
ing out that he has not yet seen the final site plan, but plays
down the difficulty of preparing such a plan. W hen he points
out a potential problem, he makes the remedy seem easy:
Now, this is just a simple layout here. There are other ways, I'm
sure, to do it.

And he tries to make the negative information palatable by sur­
rounding it with “ good news":
T he building plans, the structure itself, is no problem, but I think
that, within the zoning bylaws, we've got to . . . look at very closely
in the site plan. Okay? Now, uh, and as far as the building is con­
cerned, 1 think we can work out the details with the building in­
spector about the code requirements . . . something you work with
all the time anyway."

The planner deals with negative information by minimizing
it, making the remedy seem easy, and surrounding it with good
news.
As he preps the developer, he suggests the form of an accept­
able answer but makes clear that someone else will finally grade
the exam:
Now, uh, I don't want to prejudge, but the one question they're
going to ask is, what hardship do you have with this particular
piece of property?

219

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

He is careful to say that the developer will have to work out
the details by himself:
p:

d:
p:

In order to do something in these times when costs are differ­
ent, you need to increase the income potential of the build­
ing, and in order to do that, you need to rehabilitate the
building.
Exactly.
But they're gonna want to know specifics, and I think that's
the kind of thinking you ought to work on. Okay?

The planner's problem seems to be this: without usurping the
board's evaluative role or doing the developer's work for him,
he must make sure that the developer will be able to give the
right answers.
W hen he responds to proposals for a few more apartments
or a new building, he behaves again as though he had to meet
conflicting requirements. He tries to prevent the developer
from putting forward proposals the board will reject:
. . . there's only so much you can put on this land. . . . That's the
criterion.

But he also tries to avoid discouraging proposals the board may
accept:
. . . as long as you're dealing with existing buildings, you know,
14,000 square feet of land is not, I think, going to be a serious
problem.

Having thus conveyed the impression that he can predict or
even influence the Board's behavior, he ends by setting a limit
to his own authority.
. . . I'm not going to say yes or no. . . .
. . . I'm not the Zoning Board of Appeals. . . That's their decision.
220

Town Planning: Limits to Reflection-in-Action
Thus as he reviews the developer's plans, prepares him for this
forthcoming session with the Board of Appeals, and bargains
with him, the planner performs a balancing act. He tries to
criticize the developer's plans without discouraging him. He
tries to be stringent in his review of plans and at the same time
permissive. He tries to lead the developer along the right lines
without reducing the developer's responsibility for his own pro­
posal. And he behaves authoritatively while presenting himself
as devoid of authority.
Framing the role and the situation. Just as we can under­
stand the planner's behavior in terms of the problems he has
set for himself, so we can see these problems, and the resulting
balancing act, as a consequence of the way he has chosen to
frame his role.
W hen the planner began to work for the town, he knew that
several roles were open to him. Like his predecessor, he could
have made himself into a writer of plans, covering the walls
of his office with maps and charts. Or he could have become
a community organizer and advocate. He chose, instead, the
intermediary role.
He seeks to bring to reality his image of what is good for
the town, but he cannot initiate anything. Like a labor medi­
ator, marriage counselor, co-ordinator, or broker, he must so­
licit and respond to the initiatives of others. He can only plan
by proxy, through his influence on the plans of others. In this
intermediate function, he is interdependent with those who
initiate and with those who have regulatory authority. W ith ­
out the planner's advice and help, the developers cannot un­
derstand and negotiate the hurdles they must jump in order
to gain permission to build in the town. W ithout their pro­
posals, the planner cannot realize his image of what is good
for the town. W ithout the Zoning Board of Appeals, the
planner has no function. W ithout the planner's screening
221

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

and tailoring of development projects, the board could not do
its regulatory job.
These interdependencies are essential conditions for the “ re­
view game” which the planner plays with the developers. The
developers come to the planner for advice and review of plans,
and he uses this to bargain with them. In return for their con­
cessions to his image of what is good for the town, he will help
them get what they want from the board. As he remarks in
an interview,
W hen a person gets in a variance case or a special zoning case,
I immediately see an opportunity for negotiation and an opportu­
nity for us to lend some assistance, and maybe give away a little
within bounds, but also extract something for the town.

The planner tries to win the review game by wringing conces­
sions from the developer, while at the same time helping him
to pass the board’s review. The developer tries to win by getting
concessions from the planner without paying too great a price
for them. The planner can lose the game in two ways: by allow­
ing bad projects to get through, or by discouraging good ones.
The developer can also lose in two ways: by failing to get his
project through, or by paying too high a price for getting it
through.
In order to be able to play the review game, the planner must
maintain his credibility both with the developers and with the
Zoning Board of Appeals. W ith both groups, he has worked
hard to shape the attitudes and expectations which are essential
to his intermediary functions. A t the beginning, he had to
create the institutional arrangements which legitimize his role.
As he explained,
Under the old zoning bylaws, there was no requirement that we
file a report. W e took it upon ourselves to file. Under the new zon­
222

Town Planning: Limits to Reflection-in-Action
ing bylaws, which we wrote, there are more stringent standards.
W e will continue our same policy, but by addressing specific items
in various cases. These are now in the bylaws.

He had also to create, in developers and board members, a net­
work of expectations. Board members had to learn to respect
his expertise; developers, to respect his influence with and
knowledge about the board. These expectations had to become
routine and, once routinized, they had to be continually rein­
forced.
Thus the planner has a dual objective. In order to improve
the town he must win the review game, but he must also main­
tain the credibility on which his role depends. In these two
requirements, which turn out to conflict with one another, lie
the origins of his balancing act.
As the planner reviews the developer’s plans, he must search
out mismatches between the plan and the pertinent rules.
For each mismatch, he must estimate the likelihood that the
board will grant or withold an exception to the rule. He must
invest ways of circumventing their negative responses, and he
must predict their reactions to such efforts at circumvention.
His knowledge-in-practice must be adequate to all of these
activities. But in addition, he must avoid being perceived as
a usurper of the board’s regulatory function. For if he is so
perceived, both members of the board and developers will
cease to regard him as an intermediary. On the other hand,
if he is perceived as lacking in knowledge or influence, he will
be unable to bargain successfully. Similarly, he must be tough
enough to screen out unacceptable projects, or he will lose his
credibility with the board. Yet he must not exclude accept­
able projects, or he will shut off the flow of proposals.
As he preps the developer, the planner must anticipate the
board’s questions, distinguish the less from the more important

223

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

of these, and determine the direction of acceptable answers.
He must also gauge the developer's understanding of the prob­
lems, distinguish what he can and cannot do for himself, and
motivate him to do the necessary homework. At the same time,
he must avoid becoming identified with the developer's propos­
als or he will cease to be regarded as an intermediary.
The planner's bargaining with the developer follows a famil­
iar schema. There are two parties, each of whom has a stake
in the outcomes of interaction. Each must communicate his
own wants, learn what the other wants, formulate proposals,
and learn the other's responses to them. Each gives something
in order to get something, trying to get as much as he can while
giving as little as possible, and the process continues until each
party gets what he is willing to settle for, or until one party
decides to stop. In order to bargain effectively, the planner
must know a great deal about costs and benefits of interest to
the developer, and he must know a great deal about the board's
likely responses to proposed concessions and about the effects
of such concessions on the quality of building in the town. But
the planner must conduct his bargaining without appearing to
usurp the board's role.
The problems the planner sets for himself are the problems
of balancing these several constraints. In order to review effec­
tively while preserving his credibility as an intermediary, he
strives for thoroughness and clarity but also insists on present­
ing his review as preliminary. In order to insure that acceptable
projects will be approved while at the same time protecting
his intermediate status, he tries to make sure that the developer
understands how to answer the board's questions while at the
same time distancing himself from the developer's proposal.
In order to bargain effectively without discouraging the flow
of proposals, he tries to convey negative information and also
to make it palatable, and he tries to convey his ability to make

224

Town Planning: Limits to Reflection-in-Action
or withold concessions while at the same time remaining
within the bounds of his legitimate authority.
In the bargaining process, especially, the planner’s balancing
act leads to strange effects. Clearly, planner and developer bar­
gain with one another. Privately, the planner states explicitly
that they do so. Yet in their public meeting, they give the im­
pression of attempting to conceal what they are doing.
W hen the developer makes a bid for concessions, he does
so indirectly, by referring to a conversation with his uncle. And
when the planner responds, he says,
[I don’t think it’s] going to be a serious problem. But I’m not the
Zoning Board of Appeals.

The developer bids indirectly, by appearing to transmit his
uncle’s request for a clarification of the rules, and the planner
responds indirectly, by guardedly predicting the board’s reac­
tion.
W h y this indirectness, as though the success of the game
depended on appearing not to play it? In the planner’s case,
the explanation lies in the conflicting requirements that flow
from his dual objective. He must negotiate with developers,
and in order to do so, he must claim, at least implicitly, to be
able to make or influence the board’s decisions on requests for
variances. But this claim makes him vulnerable to the danger
that developers will put him in place of the board. The board
might resent this usurpation of their authority, and developers
might take it as a cue for increased pressure or even, perhaps,
for bribery. Hence the planner’s frequent “ I’m not the Zoning
Board of Appeals!” , uttered just when he has made an implicit
claim to authority.
In the developer’s case, he acts as though he were colluding
with the planner by appearing to share the assumption that

225

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

the latter has no authority. If the planner is to appear to have
no authority, the developer must appear to make no bids for
concessions.
But this collusion, which makes the review game into an
“ open secret,” adds a new layer of ambiguity to a process that
is already ambiguous. In the review game, each possible viola­
tion of the bylaw is also a possible bargaining point. W hen the
planner brings up such an item, he may or may not be commu­
nicating an invitation to negotiation. If, in addition to this, the
planner and the developer cannot admit to the game they are
playing, then ambiguous invitations and ambiguous responses
can never be publicly clarified.
The self-reinforcing system of knowing-in-practice. The plan­
ner’s balancing act flows from the particular way in which he
has framed his intermediary role. It is true that his twofold ob­
jective is inherently conflictual, requiring that he negotiate
with developers without infringing on the board’s authority,
but this is not by itself sufficient to create the conditions for
the balancing act. These follow from the theory of action he
uses to set and solve the problems of his interactions with de­
velopers and members of the board.
The planner’s interpersonal theory of action conforms to a
model that Chris Argyris and I have called Model I.4 An indi­
vidual who conforms to Model I behaves according to charac­
teristic values and strategies of action. His values include the
following:

•
•
•
•

226

Achieve the task, as I define it.
In win/lose interactions with others, try to win and avoid los­
ing.
Avoid negative feelings, such as anger or resentment.
Be rational, in the sense of “ Keep cool, be persuasive, use ration­
al argument.”

Town Planning: Limits to Reflection-in-Action
Among the strategies by which he tries to satisfy these values,
there are the following:

•
•
•

Control the task unilaterally.
Protect yourself unilaterally, without testing to see whether
you need to do so.
Protect the other unilaterally, without testing to see whether
he wishes to be protected.

W hen the several parties to an interaction behave according
to Model I, there are predictable consequences. The behavioral
world— the world of experienced interpersonal interaction—
tends to be win/lose. The participants in it act defensively and
are perceived as doing so. Attributions to others tend to be
tested privately, not publicly, for public testing carries a per­
ceived risk of vulnerability. Hence, attributions tend to become
self-sealing; the individual cannot get the data that would disconfirm them. And individuals tend to employ strategies of
mystery and mastery, seeking to master the situation while
keeping their own thoughts and feelings mysterious.
The planner in our protocol frames the problems of his
meeting with the developer in a Model I way and brings a
Model I theory of action to their solution. He perceives the
review game, which he plays with the developer, as a win/lose
game. He sets and tries to solve problems by a strategy of mys­
tery and mastery.
He has decided ahead of time, for example, what the devel­
oper needs to know. In order to make sure that the developer
gets the right message, he sets up the meeting in his own of­
fice and asks the architect to be present, because he believes
the architect will help the developer to pay closer attention
to what is going on. He introduces his agenda at the begin­
ning of the meeting and follows it rigorously throughout. He

227

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

stamps in the messages he regards as important, and uses his
expertise (as in the matter of parking spaces) to reinforce his
strategy of control.
In order to keep the developer from reacting defensively to
negative information, he uses a variety of techniques to soften
or mask the impact of his criticisms of the plans. He preps the
developer for his presentation to the Zoning Board of Appeals,
while indicating to the developer that he must treat the pro­
posal as his own. And he negotiates with the developer, exhibit­
ing the authority he denies, and induces the developer to col­
lude with him in appearing not to be negotiating.
The intermediary role, by itself, requires none of these strat­
egies of action. But the planner’s framing of the intermediary
role does require them. The balancing act follows from the fact
that the planner keeps the conflicting demands of the interme­
diary role to himself and attempts to manage them by unilater­
ally controlling the impressions he creates in the minds of oth­
ers. Thus his framing of the role, his setting of the problems
of the meeting, and his Model I theory of action, make up a
self-reinforcing system. One could say either that he has
framed role and problems to suit his theory of action, or that
he has evolved a theory of action suited to the role and prob­
lems he has framed.

Limits to Reflection-in-Action
The planner is an individual who likes to reflect on his practice.
Indeed, his willingness to participate in our research grew out
of this interest. But he limits his reflection to his strategies of

228

Town Planning: Limits to Reflection-in-Action
unilaterial control. He mentioned in an interview, for example,
that he spends time experimenting with such rhetorical devices
as delivery, intonation, and eye contact. He reflects on the
strategies by which he tries to create the desired impressions
in others, but he does not reflect on the role frame, problem
setting, or theory of action which lead him to try to create one
impression rather than another.
Indeed, his balancing act and his strategy of mystery and
mastery are bound together in a system of knowing-in-practice
which tends, in several ways, to make itself immune to reflec­
tion. Since the planner is doing one thing while appearing to
do another, he cannot easily make his assumptions public or
subject them to public testing. His sense of vulnerability dis­
courages reflection. And he is so busy managing the balancing
act, manipulating the impressions he makes on others and de­
fending against vulnerability to exposure, that he has little op­
portunity to reflect on the problem settings that drive his per­
formance. Moreover, for the same reason, he is unlikely to
detect errors of interpretation which might provoke broader
and deeper reflection.
Our protocol contains, as it turns out, an example of just
such an error.
In an interview following his meeting with the planner, the
developer revealed that he had decided against going forward
with his project because he would have to apply for a single vari­
ance. He had other opportunities for investment, he explained,
and he did not want to spend his energies on what he thought
would be a long and cumbersome process of appeal. He had
made this decision during his meeting with the planner, but
he had chosen not to reveal it.
W hen he learned of the developer’s decision, the planner
was shocked. He had based his strategy on minimizing vari­

229

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

ances, but he had assumed that a single, easily obtainable vari­
ance on lot size would not stand in the project’s way.
Nevertheless, to the developer, the need for a single variance
had loomed large. And he had responded with a strategy of
mystery and mastery similar to the planner’s. He had run a pri­
vate test of project feasibility, and when it produced negative
results, he had decided unilaterally to abandon the project.
The planner’s and developer’s theories of action had com­
bined to produce a behavioral world in which each withheld
negative information, tested assumptions privately, and sought
to maintain unilateral control over the other. In this sort of
climate, the developer was unlikely to reveal his negative deci­
sion. T o do so would have violated the “ open secret” of the
review game into which the planner had drawn him, and it
would also have called for a degree of trust unlikely within a
Model I behavioral world. For similar reasons, the planner was
unlikely to make a public test of his assumptions about the de­
veloper’s decisions.
As a result, the planner was unaware that his efforts had been
futile from the moment the developer learned of the need for
a single variance. The planner had no access to information
that might have put this pivotal assumption in doubt.
It is of interest, nevertheless, to ask what might have hap­
pened if, contrary to fact, the planner had become aware of
his mistake. In what directions might his inquiry then have
taken him?
This is a peculiar sort of question because, in order to have
become aware of this information, the planner would have had
to behave according to a very different theory of action, one
conducive to the public testing of private assumptions. Argyris
and I have proposed a model of such a theory of action, which
we call Model II. The question stated above then becomes the

230

Town Planning: Limits to Reflection-in-Action
following: W hat might have happened if the planner had oper­
ated on a Model II theory of action?
An individual who conforms to Model II tries to satisfy the
following values:
•
•
•
•

•
•

Give and get valid information.
Seek out and provide others with directly observable data and
correct reports, so that valid attributions can be made.
Create the conditions for free and informed choice.
Try to create, for oneself and for others, awareness of the val­
ues at stake in decision, awareness of the limits of one's capaci­
ties, and awareness of the zones of experience free of defense
mechanisms beyond one's control.
Increase the likelihood of internal commitment to decisions
made.
Try to create conditions, for oneself and for others, in which
the individual is committed to an action because it is intrinsi­
cally satisfying— not, as in the case of Model I, because it is
accompanied by external rewards or punishments.

These three values are interconnected in several ways. Valid
information is essential to informed choice. Freedom of choice
depends on one's ability to select objectives that challenge
one's capacities within a tolerable range, which again depends
on valid information. An individual is more likely to feel inter­
nally committed to a freely made decision.
Among the strategies for achieving these values, there are
the following:
•

•

Make designing and managing the environment a bilateral
task, so that the several parties to the situation can work toward
freedom of choice and internal commitment.
Make protection of self or other a joint operation, so that one
does not withold negative information from the other without
testing the attribution that underlies the decision to withhold.

23JL

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION
•

•

Speak in directly observable categories, providing the data
from which one’s inferences are drawn and thereby opening
them to disconfirmation.
Surface private dilemmas, so as to encourage the public testing
of the assumptions on which such dilemmas depend.

W hen the several parties to an interaction behave according
to Model 11, they tend to be seen by others as minimally defen­
sive and open to learning. They tend to be seen as firmly com­
mitted to their positions but equally committed to having them
confronted and tested. Discussions tend then to be open to
the reciprocal exploration of risky ideas. Assumptions are more
likely to be subjected to public test and are less likely to become
self-sealing. Learning cycles— not only with respect to the
means for achieving one’s goals but with respect to the desir­
ability of the goals— tend to be set in motion.
If the planner had been operating on a Model II theory of
action, he would not have devoted his energies to maintaining
unilateral control of his own agenda, but would also have tried
to elicit the developer’s agenda. He would have tested for the
developer’s responses to the information that a variance would
be required, and he would therefore increase the likelihood of
discovering that for the developer the need for a single variance
was enough to make the project unattractive.
Had he become aware of this negative information, the plan­
ner might have gone on to reflect on his approach to the con­
flicting demands of his intermediate role. He might ask, for
example, why he finds himself in the position of having to bar­
gain with the developer without appearing to do so— a condi­
tion that exacerbates the problem of getting access to crucial
information about the developer’s intentions. This condition
grows out of the planner’s balancing act which depends, in
turn, on his attempt to manage the conflicting demands of his

232

Town Planning: Limits to Reflection-in-Action
role by a strategy of mystery and mastery— that is, by keeping
his conflicting objectives private while controlling the impres­
sions he creates in the minds of developers and members of
the board.
If he were operating on a Model II theory of action, the
planner might ask himself, “ W hat if I were to make my di­
lemma public?” This would have implications for his conduct
both with board members and with developers. It would carry
risks, but it would offer the possibility of important benefits.
In a more open discussion of his role in the town, the planner
might describe to the board his strategy of using “ review of
plans” to seek out opportunities for negotiation with develop­
ers. He might point out that he cannot negotiate effectively
unless he can exercise some authority of his own, without fear­
ing that the board will later reverse his decisions. A t the same
time, he might indicate his recognition of the fact that final
decisions do remain with the board. He might invite the board
to monitor his negotiations, working with him to keep the lines
of authority clear and at the same time flexible. By surfacing
these issues, it is true, he might irritate some members of the
board; but he might also confirm publicly what many of them
had already privately suspected.
W ith developers, the planner might admit that, while his
actions are subject to the board's final approval, he does have
some discretionary freedom to decide on requests for variances.
In doing this, he might open himself to more vigorous attempts
on the part of developers to subject him to pressure or persua­
sion. It is hard to see how this would be a very great risk, howev­
er. Since the developers already bargain with him, they must
believe that he has some freedom to carry out his end of the
bargain.
Under these conditions, the planner would have reframed
his balancing act. The central conflict of his intermediary role

233

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

would remain but it would be a public conflict. There would
be no need to bargain while appearing not to do so. The plan­
ner would be less likely to make undetected errors. At the same
time, he would experience new demands for Model II behav­
ior. He would no longer measure his effectiveness in terms of
the successful performance of his balancing act but in terms
of his ability to bargain openly, to share control of the interac­
tion, to advocate his own goals firmly while inquiring effec­
tively into the goals of others. He would also reduce some of
the impediments to his further reflection-in-action.

Conclusion
The case of the town planner illustrates, in one small episode
drawn from the practice of one planner, how and with what
sorts of consequences planning roles are framed. I have tried
to show how planning roles have evolved in a global conversa­
tion with the planning situation which has led, at various times
over the past decades, to the salience of centralist planning,
advocacy, regulatory, and intermediary roles. But I have also
tried to show, in the case of a practitioner of intermediary plan­
ning, how knowing-in-practice consists of a self-reinforcing sys­
tem in which role frame, strategies of action, relevant facts,
and interpersonal theories of action are bound up together.
The intermediary role, in which a practitioner places himself
between those who propose and those who dispose, carries in­
herent potentials for conflict. Nevertheless, the meaning of
this conflict for practice varies greatly with the way in which
each practitioner frames his role. Role frame is interdependent
with interpersonal theory of action, and the resulting system
of knowing-in-practice has consequences both for the practi­

*34

Town Planning: Limits to Reflection-in-Action
tioner's ability to detect crucial errors and for the scope and
direction of his reflection-in-action. In our example, the plan­
ner's balancing act is tied to his Model I theory-in-use. In the
alternative that I have outlined, a Model II theory-in-use would
be linked to a framing of the intermediary role in which private
dilemmas would be made public and private assumptions
would be subjected to public test. In the first case, attributions
tend to become self-sealing, and reflection-in-action tends to
be limited to consideration of the effectiveness of strategies of
unilaterial control. In the second case, errors of attribution are
more likely to surface and reflection-in-action is more likely to
extend in scope to the entire system of knowing-in-practice,
including the framing of the role itself.
So long as a practitioner chooses to play an intermediary role,
he cannot avoid the conflicts inherent in the role. But within
these constraints, he has considerable freedom to choose the
role frame he will adopt and the theory of action according
to which he will behave. Depending on these interdependent
choices, he will increase or constrict his capacity for reflectionin-action.

235

§
The A rt of Managing:
Reflection- in- Action
Within an Organizational
Learning System

The Split in the Field of Management
The field of management has long been marked by a conflict
between two competing views of professional knowledge. On
the first view, the manager is a technician whose practice con­
sists in applying to the everyday problems of his organization
the principles and methods derived from management science.
On the second, the manager is a craftsman, a practitioner of

236

T he Art o f M anaging: R eflection-in-A ction
an art of m anaging that cannot be reduced to explicit rules and
theories. T h e first view dates from the early decades o f the
tw en tieth century w hen the idea of professional m anagem ent
first cam e into good currency. T h e second has an even longer
history, m anagem ent having been understood as an art, a m at­
ter of skill and w isdom , long before it began to be understood
as a body of techniques. But the first view has gained steadily
in power.

The idea of management science, and the complementary
idea of the manager as a technician, has been carried by a social
movement which has spread out from its center in the United
States to encompass the whole of the industrialized world. The
origins of this movement are difficult to identify, but a critically
important milestone in its development was the work of Fred­
erick Taylor who, in the 1920s, conceived of management as
a form of human engineering based on a science of work.1
W hile Taylor may not have invented these ideas, he was cer­
tainly the first to embody them in a practice of industrial man­
agement and consultation, and he popularized them in a way
that has had enormous influence in industry, in business, and
in the administration of public agencies.
T aylo r treated work as a m an /m ach in e process w h ich could
be decom posed into m easurable units of activity. E very indus­
trial process, from the shovelling of coal to th e processing of
steel, could be subjected to experim ental analysis. T h e design
o f tools, the bodily m ovem ents o f the worker, and th e sequenc­
ing o f production steps, could be com bined in an optim um
configuration, a "o n e best w ay/' T aylo r saw th e industrial m an­
ager as a designer of work, a controller and m onitor o f perform ­
ance, and a distributor of rewards and punishm ents carefully
selected and applied so as to yield optim ally efficient produc­
tion. A b o ve all, he saw the m anager as an on-line experim enter,

237

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

a scientist in action, whose practice would consist in the trial
and measurement of designs and methods aimed at the discov­
ery and implementation of the one best way.
Taylor’s views were by no means unique. Thorsten Veblen,
to take one extraordinary example, also perceived that industry
had taken on the characteristics of an organizational machine
within which managers of the business enterprise must be in­
creasingly concerned with standards, measures of performance,
and the articulation of interlocking activities. But it was Taylor
who embodied these ideas in practiace, and it was Taylor’s ver­
sion of the practice of industrial engineering, efficiency exper­
tise, and time and motion study which has evolved into the
management science of the present day.
World W ar II gave an enormous impetus to the manage­
ment science movement, first, because of the general rise in
prestige of science and technology, and second, because of the
birth of operations research and systems theory. These disci­
plines, which grew out of the use of applied mathematics to
solve problems of submarine search and bomb tracking, were
later exported to industry, commerce, and government. In the
wake of World W ar II, management science grew to maturity.
Teachers and researchers in the new schools of management,
in partnership with managers in public and private sectors,
have engendered a plethora of new techniques. There is no
field of management which has been immune to the incursions
of management science. W hat was once true only of industrial
production has now become true of sales, personnel selection
and training, budgeting and financial control, marketing, busi­
ness policy, and strategic planning. Technical panaceas have
appeared on the scene with clocklike regularity, old ones mak­
ing way for new. Value analysis, management by objectives,
planning programming and budgeting, and zero-based budget­
ing are only a few of the better-known examples. Even the

238

The Art of Managing: Reflection-in-Action
human relations movement, which had originated as a reaction
against Taylorism, has tended increasingly to present itself as
a body of techniques.
Yet in spite of the increasingly powerful status of manage­
ment science and technique, managers have remained persis­
tently aware of important areas of practice which fall outside
the bounds of technical rationality. This awareness has taken
two forms.
Managers have become increasingly sensitive to the phe­
nomena of uncertainty, change, and uniqueness. In the last
twenty years, “ decision under uncertainty” has become a term
of art. It has become commonplace for managers to speak of
the “ turbulent” environments in which problems do not lend
themselves to the techniques of benefit-cost analysis or to prob­
abilistic reasoning. A t least at the level of espoused theory,
managers have become used to the instability of patterns of
competition, economic context, consumer interests, sources of
raw materials, attitudes of the labor force, and regulatory cli­
mate. And managers have become acutely aware that they are
often confronted with unique situations to which they must
respond under conditions of stress and limited time which
leave no room for extended calculation or analysis. Here they
tend to speak not of technique but of “ intuition.”
Quite apart from these exceptions to the day-to-day routine
of management practice, managers have remained aware of a
dimension of ordinary professional work, crucially important
to effective performance, which cannot be reduced to tech­
nique. Indeed, they are sometimes aware that even manage­
ment technique rests on a foundation of nonrational, intuitive
artistry.
Among theorists of management, the nonrational dimension
of managing has had several notable exponents. In chapter 2,
I have cited Chester Barnard’s description of “ nonlogical pro­

239

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION
cesses/' G eoffrey V ickers's analysis of the art of judgm ent, and
M ich ael Polanyi's reflections on tacit knowing. M ore recently,
a C anad ian professor of m anagem ent, H enry M in tzb erg, has
caused a considerable stir with studies of the actual behavior
o f top managers that reveal a virtual absence of the m ethods
that m anagers are “ supposed to " use.2 A n d in som e of the most
prestigious schools of m anagem ent, w here the curriculum de­
pends on cases drawn from the actual experience of business
firms, there is a widely held belief that managers learn to be
effective not primarily through the study of theory and tech ­
nique but through long and varied practice in the analysis of
business problem s, w hich builds up a generic, essentially unanalyzable capacity for problem solving.
It is no exaggeration, then, to say that the field o f m anage­
m ent is split into two cam ps, each of w hich holds a different
view o f the nature o f professional knowledge. A t the same tim e
that m anagem ent science and technique have grown increas­
ingly in power and prestige, there has been a persistent and
grow ing awareness o f the im portance of an art of m anaging
w hich reveals itself both in crucially im portant situations o f un­
certainty, instability, and uniqueness, and in those dim ensions
o f everyday practice w hich depend upon the spontaneous exer­
cise of intuitive artistry. O n e sign o f this split is that in som e
schools o f m anagem ent, representatives of the two tenden­
cies— the professors of m anagem ent science and the practi­
tioners o f case-m ethod— no longer speak to one another. T h e
representatives of each school o f thought go about their busi­
ness as though the other school o f thought did not exist.
B ut a split o f this kind, w hich is barely tolerable in a profes­
sional school, creates for thoughtful students and practitioners
a particularly painful variant of the dilem m a of “ rigor or rele­
va n ce." For if rigorous m anagem ent means the application of
m anagem ent science and technique, then a “ rigorous m anag­

240

The Art of Managing: Reflection-in-Action
er” must be selectively inattentive to the art which he brings
to much of his day-to-day practice, and he must avoid situa­
tions— often the most important in organizational life— where
he would find himself confronted with uncertainty, instability,
or uniqueness.
But if the art of managing can be described, at least in part,
and can be shown to be rigorous in a way peculiar to itself,
then the dilemma of rigor or relevance need not be so painful.
Indeed, it may be possible to bring the art of managing into
dialogue with management science.

The Art of Managing
In management as in other fields, “ art” has a two-fold mean­
ing. It may mean intuitive judgment and skill, the feeling for
phenomena and for action that I have called knowing-in­
practice. But it may also designate a manager’s reflection, in
a context of action, on phenomena which he perceives as incongruent with his intuitive understandings.
Managers do reflect-in-action. Sometimes, when reflection
is triggered by uncertainty, the manager says, in effect, “ This
is puzzling; how can I understand it?” Sometimes, when a
sense of opportunity provokes reflection, the manager asks,
“ W hat can I make of this?” And sometimes, when a manager
is surprised by the success of his own intuitive knowing, he asks
himself, “ W hat have I really been doing?”
Whatever the triggering condition, a manager’s reflectionin-action is fundamentally similar to reflection-in-action in
other professional fields. It consists in on-the-spot surfacing,
criticizing, restructuring, and testing of intuitive understand­
ings of experienced phenomena; often it takes the form of a

241

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

reflective conversation with the situation. But a manager's re­
flection-in-action also has special features of its own. A manag­
er's professional life is wholly concerned with an organization
which is both the stage for his activity and the object of his
inquiry. Hence, the phenomena on which he reflects-in-action
are the phenomena of organizational life. Organizations, fur­
thermore, are repositories of cumulatively built-up knowledge:
principles and maxims of practice, images of mission and iden­
tity, facts about the task environment, techniques of operation,
stories of past experience which serve as exemplars for future
action. W hen a manager reflects-in-action, he draws on this
stock of organizational knowledge, adapting it to some present
instance. And he also functions as an agent of organizational
learning, extending or restructuring, in his present inquiry, the
stock of knowledge which will be available for future inquiry.
Finally, managers live in an organizational system which
may promote or inhibit reflection-in-action. Organizational
structures are more or less adaptable to new findings, more or
less resistant to new tasks. The behavioral world of the organi­
zation, the characteristic pattern of interpersonal relations, is
more or less open to reciprocal reflection-in-action— to the sur­
facing of negative information, the working out of conflicting
views, and the public airing of organizational dilemmas. Insofar
as organizational structure and behavioral world condition or­
ganizational inquiry, they make up what I will call the “ learn­
ing system" of the organization. The scope and direction of
a manager's reflection-in-action are strongly influenced, and
may be severely limited, by the learning system of the organiza­
tion in which he practices.
These distinctively organizational aspects of a manager's re­
flection-in-action must enter into any good description of the
art of managing. In the examples that follow, I shall sample
a range of organizational phenomena with which reflective

242

The Art of Managing: Reflection-in-Action
managers concern themselves: the problem of interpreting the
external environment’s response to organizational action, the
diagnosis of signs of trouble within an organization, the process
by which an organization learns from its experience, and the
effects of an organizational learning system on the way in
which organizational problems are set and solved. I shall limit
myself to the experience of business firms, not because business
managers are more reflective than others but because they are
the source of my freshest examples. In the business context,
the kinds of organizational phenomena noted above may be
illustrated by the behavior of a market, the problems of a pro­
duction plant, the acquisition of knowledge about product de­
velopment, and the learning system of a product development
organization.
In all of these examples, I shall describe processes that man­
agers often undertake but on which they seldom reflect. Man­
agers do reflect-in-action, but they seldom reflect on their re­
flection-in-action. Hence this crucially important dimension of
their art tends to remain private and inaccessible to others.
Moreover, because awareness of one’s intuitive thinking usually
grows out of practice in articulating it to others, managers
often have little access to their own reflection-in-action. The
resulting mysteriousness of the art of managing has several
harmful consequences. It tends to perpetuate the split in the
field of management, creating a misleading impression that
practitioners must choose between practice based on manage­
ment science and an essentially mysterious artistry. And it pre­
vents the manager from helping others in his organization to
learn to do what he can do. Since he cannot describe his reflection-in-action, he cannot teach others to do it. If they acquire
the capacity for it, they do so by contagion. Yet one of a manag­
er’s most important functions is the education of his subordi­
nates.

243

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION
For all of these reasons, it seems to m e critically im portant
to begin to describe how m anagers do reflect-in-action and how
their reflection-in-action is lim ited.

Interpreting market phenom ena . A business firm is con tin u ­
ally in interaction w ith its m arkets, and markets are often in
a state o f flux— som e of w hich is induced by the action o f the
business firm itself. In the contem porary business setting, in­
quiry into m arket phenom ena has becom e a specialized fu n c­
tion in its own right. M arket researchers and strategists have
developed principles of m arketing, m odels of m arket behavior,
and techniques of m arket exploration and analysis. N everth e­
less, m uch of w hat managers encounter in the m arketplace re­
sists the application of ready-m ade theories and procedures.
M arket research cannot say very m uch about consum er re­
sponse to a radically new product. People cannot readily answer
questions about their interest in som ething of w hich they have
neither direct nor indirect experience. A t best, if they are
helped to carry out the im aginative feat o f supposing th em ­
selves in possession o f a nonexistent product, they m ay specu­
late on their future responses to it. B ut speculation o f this sort
is usually a very poor predictor of their behavior toward an ac­
tual product, m ore or less like the one described, w hich will
appear one day, in a particular package and at a particular price,
on superm arket shelves. If prototypes of the new product are
produced (and it takes m oney to develop and produce them ),
then consum er panels m ay provide inform ation from w hich
m anagers can m ake inferences about actual m arket behavior.
But the gap betw een panel response and m arket response is
significant. O n ly w ith the introduction o f large-scale m arket
tests do m anufacturers begin to get reliable inform ation about
m arket behavior, and regional m arket tests can also produce
m isleading results.
A t each stage of the developm ent of a radically new product,

244

The Art of Managing: Reflection-in-Action
managers must make investment decisions in the absence of
adequate information or rules for rational decision. Each such
judgment is a unique case, and the market tests, which may
reduce uncertainty, come only at the price of further invest­
ment.
The full-scale marketing of a product is also a test of sorts,
and managers often find themselves confronted with surprising
data that demand interpretation.
Shortly after World W ar II, to take one rather celebrated
example, the 3M Corporation put on the market a clear cellu­
lose acetate tape, coated on one side with pressure-sensitive ad­
hesive, which they called Scotch Tape. They had intended it
for use as a book-mending material, a way of preserving things
that would otherwise have to be thrown away; hence the name
Scotch. But in consumers’ hands, the product came to be used
in many different ways, most of which had nothing to do with
mending books. It was used to wrap packages, to fasten pictures
to the wall, to make labels, to decorate surfaces, even to curl
hair. 3M ’s managers did not regard these surprising uses as a
failure of their initial marketing plan, nor did they merely ac­
cept them as a happy accident. They noticed them and tried
to make sense of them as a set of messages about potential mar­
kets. The company began to market types of Scotch Tape spe­
cially designed for use in such applications as packaging, deco­
rating, and hair curling.
3M ’s marketing managers treated their product as a projec­
tive test for consumers. They reflected on unanticipated signals
from the marketplace, interpreted them, and then tested their
interpretations by adapting the product to the uses that con­
sumers had already discovered. But their tests were also moves
aimed at strengthening market position and probes which
might yield additional surprises. Their marketing process was
a reflective conversation with consumers.

245

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

Interpreting organizational troubles. W hen a manager first
gets signals that something is going wrong in his organization,
he usually has no clear, consensual account of the trouble. Vari­
ous members of the organization, who occupy different posi­
tions and have different interests, tell different and often con­
flicting stories. If the manager is to take action, he must make
some sense of the organizational Rashomon; but by inquiring
into the situation, he also influences it. Hence he faces a two­
fold problem: how to find out what (if anything) is wrong, and
how to do so in a way that enhances rather than reduces his
ability to fix what is wrong.
Consider a case drawn from the recent experience of a man­
ufacturer of scientific instruments.
The company, based in a developing country, was founded
some fifteen years ago by a nuclear physicist who, with a small
group of former students and colleagues, built a very narrow
product line into a $100 million dollar business. The company’s
main offices are in its home country, but it has sales and service
facilities in thirteen foreign countries. It has captured about
15 percent of the market in its field.
The founder, now chairman of the board, attributes his suc­
cess to two main principles: stay in close touch with the market,
and deliver fast responses to changes in the field.
From these two principles, many organizational conse­
quences have been made to follow. In order to get product im­
provements to the market quickly, the company often puts in­
struments in the field before all development problems have
been resolved. They depend on highly skilled technical service­
men to complete the development task. In order to achieve
fast response to market demand, customers’ orders are fre­
quently changed. About 30 percent of all manufacturing orders
are subject to engineering changes. As a result, manufacturing
has become a highly sophisticated job shop where speed and

246

The Art of Managing: Reflection-in-Action
flexibility take precedence over efficiency, which depends on
long production runs.
The company has deliberately refrained from establishing
a fixed organizational structure. There are no organization
charts. Roles are frequently overlapping and informal group
problem solving is the norm. As the founder says, “ This is no
place for people who can’t live with uncertainty.”
Role flexibility is carried to an extreme. The present vicepresident for finance is a former nuclear physicist who has
learned finance as he might have learned a new branch of phys­
ics. And every member of the top-management team has filled
virtually every major corporate function. The president of the
company, G , who began with the company fifteen years ago,
has worked in budgeting, finance, sales, and manufacturing.
He is still regarded as “ the best engineer in the company.”
Along with the founder and the vice-president for finance, he
regards work as “ fun,” likes to put “ impossible” demands on
himself, and expects others to do likewise.
G is used to reaching down into the company to deal with
whatever crisis presents itself. He has done this three or four
times. W ithin the last year, for example, he spent three months
at a computer console in order to resolve a critical software
problem that threatened to stall a major new development.
The crisis presently facing G concerns a new production
plant established a year ago to make metal parts for instru­
ments manufactured in the two main production facilities. It
is located in a development zone of the country, where it is
eligible for generous government subsidies, although it lacks
access to labor force and services which would have been avail­
able in one of the larger cities. The new manager of the plant,
M, has been hired away from a large electronics firm. He has
been in his position for a year, and during that time there have
been increasingly troublesome production delays. Recently one
247

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION
o f the m anagers of the two main instrum ent plants brought
the problem to G , w ho discussed it w ith the m anager o f the
other instrum ent plant, the vice-president for m anufacturing,
and the m anager o f the new plant, M .
T h e m anager of the first plant describes the situation as fol­
lows:

I want the parts on time and M wants efficiency! And 1want 100
different kinds of parts. Opening the new plant caused a lot of
crunches in our system. We worked night and day all last year to
solve this problem. For a while, things were okay. Then, when the
head of the metals section left because he couldn't get along with
M, we had a big decline. M tried to manage the metals section
by remote control. He should get in there and manage metals for
himself. Or perhaps we should take the operation and bring it back
to Central, in a metals shop of our own. M lacks the capacity to
manage the problem. I see no light at the end of the tunnel.
M an ager o f the second plant:

M's is a new plant built around new people. There are communica­
tions problems, because people there don’t adapt to flexible de­
mands. M is pressed between demands for efficiency and for fast
response, and he's not solving the problem. They need new staff
functions. They have problems with orders because they don't
know what's going on. They must see their raison d'etre as giving
service to us, but they won't accept that definition. They are not
equal. They feel second class.
M , m anager o f the new plant:

There's informal problem solving at Central, but between here
and Central, it can't work. You have to have more rules, even with
less flexibility, because as you grow, without new rules, you have
a mess. G prefers that we use 50 percent of our capacity and hold
people on standby to respond to orders when they come in, but
that teaches people to be inefficient. And so I sell to outsiders,

248

The Art of Managing: Reflection-in-Action
but I have to give preference to the company. It's an axiom that
you should produce efficiently, but I have to be inefficient in order
to get the parts in on time. Management attention is split.
Vice-president for manufacturing:
Right now, the new plant is G's crisis. First we must clean up the
channels of communication, providing better, more sophisticated
management tools. And we must resolve the conflict of priorities.
Most of the problems grow out of the frequent engineering
changes which are vital to the company. Two-thirds of the prob­
lem is to get the right man in the right place. One of our main
problems is a shortage of upper-middle management.
The first plant manager, who brought the problem to G , says,
I know G is working on the problem, because he hasn't erased all
the figures we put on the blackboard!
And he is right, G is working on the problem.
G has listened to the several stories about the production
delays at M's plant, but he has chosen not to decide among
them or even to try to put them all together to make a single
coherent picture of the trouble. He has read the Rashomon
as a sign of two main difficulties: a lack of effective communica­
tion among the several parties, and a split between the new
plant and central operations. He has seen his problem as one
of creating a process to deal with these two difficulties.
He has decided to treat the diagnosing of the problem as
a central part of the resolution of the problem, and has assigned
the task of diagnosis to those who are most centrally concerned.
He has asked the vice-president for manufacturing, together
with his staff of three, to spend two days a week at the new
plant over the next three months. They will work with their
counterparts there to trace the sources of delays, to review and

*49

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

repair reporting systems, to fix whatever problems in operations
they discover.
G has followed company traditions in turning the full force
of management attention onto the crisis point. But this time
he has not gone down to deal with the problem himself. He
has seen his role as one of designing and putting in place a
process to identify and fix the problem, leaving to others the
task of working out their conflicting views of it. He has set
up an organizational experiment, the essence of which is to
bring into close interaction those who have been distant from
one another.
M has reacted favorably to this move. He says, “ For the first
time, I think they are learning what it is really like here. New
capacity won’t solve our problem; it will barely let us keep up
with growth. But as the atmosphere improves and we get a bet­
ter handle on the problems, we’ll gradually remove the delays.
I’m optimistic.”
And G says, “ Perhaps as M comes to feel that people here
understand his situation better, he will begin to feel more a
part of the company, and then he may commit more fully to
his frame of reference.”
G has responded to the organizational crisis by designing a
process which will involve the key participants in collective reflection-in-action.
Learning about product development. A large American con­
sumer products firm has an extraordinary reputation as a devel­
oper of new products. Inside the firm, individual managers are
very well aware of their corporate reputation, and attribute it
to their success in learning about the process of conceiving,
inventing, and commercializing new products.
W hat is remarkable about this firm is the consciousness that
managers bring to this process, the sense they have of being
members of a corporate culture which includes a great deal of

250

The Art of Managing: Reflection-in-Action
knowledge about it, and the extent to which each manager sees
himself both as a user of the store of corporate knowledge and
a contributor to it. It is possible to dig down into the firm at
least four layers deep without losing access to the corporate res­
ervoir of knowledge about product development.
These are some examples of what product development
managers believe they have learned.
1. 'T h e target is a variable.”
One of the heads of technology remarks, "Product develop­
ment is a game you can win, so long as you keep it open— so
long as you remember you can redefine the target.” Typically,
a product development project is worked out among repre­
sentatives of marketing, technology, and general management.
Once a target has been defined, general management commits
the necessary resources. But as development proceeds, techni­
cal people learn more about the feasibility of the initial target
and more about the properties of the materials with which they
are working. They discover unexpected difficulties in achieving
the target originally chosen, and they also discover technical
possibilities they had not suspected at the outset. They can re­
define targets to reflect these discoveries, so long as they also
understand the marketing implications of their redefinition of
the target.
Thus, in one project concerned with disposable paper prod­
ucts, the development director observes, "W e found that the
critical variable was not absorptive capacity but rate of absorp­
tion!” It was much more difficult to increase absorptive capac­
ity than rate of absorption, but it was the latter that mattered
most to the consumer. In the words of one researcher, "W e
knew we were on the right track when our panels no longer
hated us!”
In order to treat the target as a variable, the development
team must be able to see a technical property of materials in
25

*

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

terms of its meaning to consumers, and they must be able to
see a marketing target in terms of the technical demands that
follow from it. Such a team cannot afford a “ seesaw” between
marketing and technology, in which marketing says to technology, “ Make what we can sell!” or technology says to marketing,
“ Sell what we can make!” Technical and marketing specialists
must be able to share the uncertainty which they convert to
risk by redefining the development target. And, like the mar­
keting managers at 3M , they must be willing to give up the
assumption that they know the target, once and for all, at the
beginning of the development process. As they discover new
properties in the phenomena and new meanings in the re­
sponses of consumer panels, they learn to restructure not only
the means but the ends of development.
2.
“ The unit of development is not a new product but a
game with the competition.”
Members of the development team think of themselves as
engaged in a game with the competition. For each major prod­
uct line, there is a national market within which many compa­
nies struggle for position. Winning this game consists in estab­
lishing, maintaining, and extending market position at the
expense of the competitors. Moves in the game consist in prod­
uct improvements, advertising campaigns, and new product in­
troductions. And for every move, competitors make counter
moves. The game lasts for the duration of the life cycle of the
product line.
Playing the game well means forming and implementing a
development strategy. A given development (a paper product
with a higher rate of absorption, for example) is likely to trigger
competitive developments, and good strategy includes antici­
pation of the likely countermoves. The development team tries
to have in the wings a set of long-term developments which
they can activate in response to competitors' moves, when the

252

The Art of Managing: Reflection-in-Action
time is right. Thus, the unit of development is not an individ­
ual product but a full cycle of the competitive game.
W ithin the game, however, there is always the question,
“ W hat is the situation now?” Depending on one's interpreta­
tion of the situation, construction of an appropriate strategy
may vary significantly. In the case of the paper product de­
scribed above, for example, there was a period in which the
team believed that they had established the basic acceptability
of their product and needed mainly to get the price down. But
a competitor introduced a new product which came in at a
higher price and achieved greater consumer acceptance than
theirs. How should they interpret their situation in the game?
A corporate vice-president made the suggestion, “ W hy don't
you come up with a Cadillac?” This was surprising to the devel­
opment team, because it ran counter to their strategy. They
did not reject it out of hand, however. They waited to see what
the market would do. Then, as they said, “ W hen we discovered
that our product was holding its own among the low-priced
brands, we were freed to work on the Cadillac. Had we brought
out a low-priced improvement, we would have cannibalized our
own brand.”
The new signals from the marketplace enabled the develop­
ment team to construct a new picture of their situation, one
which required them to revise their understanding of their po­
sition relative to other brands. And from the new description
of the situation, they evolved a new strategy which they would
test with the introduction of the “ Cadillac” (a familiar meta­
phor which, like “ cannibalizing,” is a part of the repertoire
they bring to their inquiry).
3. “ T h e im portant thin g is to keep the d ialectic m oving.”

It is unusual to find the term “ dialectic” in common usage
within a corporate culture. But in this corporation, managers
talk freely about dialectic, by which they mean the surfacing

253

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

and working out of conflicting views among participants in the
development process.
The vice-president of technology goes so far as to define his
role in terms of the dialectic. He says, “ I feel good when I see
that engineering and development, advertising and manufac­
turing, are really surfacing and talking about their differences.
It’s my job to keep the dialectic alive.”
And a general manager says, “ You must keep the conflicts
alive and on the surface. Once you have identified the conflicts,
you see to it that they resolve them and that they let you know
the results. If they agree ahead of time, too quickly, that can
shield you from legitimate conflict. It breaks your heart when
you see people have stopped talking about it.”
The expectation is that “ legitimate conflicts” will surface.
The complexity of development situations is such that engi­
neering and research, advertising and manufacturing, general
management and finance, will have different and conflicting
views of situation and strategy, all of which are important to
the organization. A manager’s task is to make sure that such
conflicts are neither surpressed nor circumvented. Organiza­
tional learning about a present situation, and about product
development more generally, depends on the “ working out”
of such conflicts. But no one can say ahead of time how they
will be worked out, which will depend on the reciprocal reflec­
tion-in-action of the parties to the conflict.

Limits of the Organizational Learning System
The very same company that is so conscious of organizational
learning about product development also provides a very good

¿54

The Art of Managing: Reflection-in-Action
example of the ways in which an organizational learning system
may constrain reflection-in-action.
As a consultant to this organization, I was asked to address
the problem of the “ burn-out” of product development direc­
tors. These individuals, who work at the intersection of general
management, advertising, and research, are hard to find, ex­
pensive to develop, and difficult to keep. They experience an
unusually high incidence of alcoholism, health problems, di­
vorce, and mental breakdown, and the vice-president for tech­
nology wanted to know why.
W e agreed that my study would take the form of an analysis
of a case of product development— Product X, as I will call
it, a product for use in household appliances. T he story of Prod­
uct X was already famous in the company when I began my
study. Nearly everyone described it in the same way: “A case
in which we nearly failed because of problems we ought to have
anticipated and dealt with better than we did. But we came
through and bailed ourselves out.”
Initially, there were three questions about the case:
•
•
•

W h y were we so late in detecting and admitting the problems?
W h y were we so unwilling to ask for help and to accept help
once it was offered?
How did we bail ourselves out?

T he product had originated in a “ brainstorming” session where
development specialists had asked themselves, “ W hat benefits
can we deliver through products designed for use in household
appliances?” W hen they had arrived at a basic product defini­
tion, they began to explore the technologies they would need,
and they hit on a particular technology, owned by a private
inventor, which they could turn to their purposes.
Their development process proceeded, as usual in this com-

^55

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION
pany, through a series of tests. T h e y tested the product's effec­
tiveness in delivering its intended benefit, and they tested it
for possible harm ful side effects. T h e testing process began in
the laboratory w here, for exam ple, standard corrosion tests
w ere perform ed by im m ersing steel plates in a bath m ade up
of the product's com ponents. A n d the process continued
through “ b lin d " tests w ith consum er panels (a standard ele­
m ent in all of their developm ent processes), and finally to re­
gional test markets. It is im portant to note that a successful
passage through such a sequence of standard tests functioned,
in this com pany, as an essential part of the dialogue betw een
technical developm ent specialists and general managers. T h e
general m anagers, w ho controlled the co m m itm ent of re­
sources, depended on the results of standard tests to m ake their
decisions.
T h e product perform ed very well in panel tests, and was
placed in its first regional test market. T w o m onths into the
test m arket, however, an appliance com pany w hich had been
asked to test the product sent back word, “ T h is product can
get stuck in the m achine, and if it does, you can get overheat­
ing. T h ere is a risk of fire." M em bers of the developm ent team
at first said, “ W e d on 't think so." B ut the appliance com pany
w rote a form al, threatening letter to general m anagem ent: “ If
you m arket this product, w e'll put stickers on our m achines tell­
ing people not to use it."
W ith this exposure of the problem , everyone started to talk
about it. G en eral m anagem ent, w ho had known nothing of the
problem , were furious. T h ree different task groups were set up
and they arrived at two different solutions. Both of these were
subsequently accepted and incorporated in a new version of
the product. But this created a new problem . W h a t should be
done w ith the existing test m arket? T h e old product had been
successful in consum er panel blind tests, and general m anage­

256

The Art of Managing: Reflection-in-Action
ment said, “ W e ’ll keep the old test market going. It’s the origi­
nal product we invested in. It passed our tests.” The technical
group nearly mutinied. But general management took the posi­
tion, “ W e can assume a liability if we want to; your job is to
tell us the odds.”
The sense of general management’s position was, “ The
product is a black box. W e make decisions about things that
pass our tests. But we don’t take the cover off the box because
we get confused.” And the sense of the technical group’s posi­
tion was, “ W e make decisions about particulars, not general
probabilities. W e understand what it is that makes a product
pass tests. And we don’t always trust the tests!”
A year later, the first test market was dropped and a new
one, based on the revised product, was instituted. But technical
people felt that the issue had “ put them into short pants.”
A t this point, the development was some two years old, with
$30 million invested.
A second major embarrassment occurred in the midst of the
second test market. The product had been doing well, when
a sprinkling of complaints came in from the field to the effect
that the product caused rust in appliances. These complaints
came in after the “ sticking” problem, and after the laboratory
immersion tests which had revealed no rusting. The technical
team chose to ignore the complaints. The rusting detected by
a few users of the product must have been produced by other
causes.
Members of the corporate research laboratory who heard
about the problem took a different view. One member of the
research group lathered some of the product’s ingredients on
a tin can and left it overnight; in the morning the can had rust­
ed. T he researchers took the rusted can to the vice-president
for technology, who said, “ There’s no red light. Don’t worry
about it. W e can handle it.” But as letters from the field multi­

*57

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

plied, the laboratory team became convinced that the rusting
effect was real. They developed a model that would explain the
rusting process, used X-ray spectroscopy to test the model, and
brought in high-powered consultants from a university. The
product development team reacted by asking, “ Are you really
sure of this? W hy are you doing this to us? W hy don't you
do something constructive?"
The laboratory group was disillusioned. The head of the lab­
oratory sent out a memo which forbade researchers to do more
work on Product X. At this point, however, the vice-president
for technology fired the head of the development team and
appointed a researcher from the laboratory to become the new
head. This man quickly satisfied himself, with the help of his
former colleagues in the laboratory, that the rusting effect was
real. This produced a new crisis.
The vice-president for technology then held a meeting with
members of the two teams. At this meeting he said, “ Are you
guys men enough to keep this problem from general manage­
ment and go ahead on faith, without knowing that you can
really do it, to make an alternative work?" This set in motion
a new process which led, eventually, to solution of the rusting
problem. The laboratory group, who had been told not to work
on the problem, continued to do so. They came up with a new
ingredient which they believed not only solved the rusting
problem but actually protected machines. The product devel­
opment team criticized them for “ shooting from the hip" and
“ overstepping their bounds." But the new head of the labora­
tory team proposed a technical-political compromise: the new
ingredient was to be combined with 10 percent of the old. New
tests showed that the rusting effect had been overcome and
the product worked as well as ever. As one member of the labo­
ratory group said, “ It was all played out under the tent, for fear
of tipping off general management and breaking their commit­

258

The Art of Managing: Reflection-in-Action
ment to the product. But at each replay of the problem there
was the same issue: Did the new element really work? W hat
about negative side effects? It was a guerrilla war, and we used
science as a weapon/'
The interactions between product development team and
research laboratory can be represented as a cycle of action and
reaction, roughly as follows.
The product development team sought to protect them­
selves, to control the task and territory, and to win credit for
their work and credibility with general management. T o these
ends, they
•
•
•
•

resisted the problems pointed out by the laboratory,
discredited the laboratory findings,
kept them in their place by confining them to narrow and un­
important problems,
kept their own work quiet.

The laboratory team became angry and frustrated, distrusted
the product development team, and felt a low sense of their
own worth. They retaliated by
•
•
•
•
•

taking an aggressive stance as they proved their points,
seeking to win through science,
continuing to work on the problem even when the boss told
them not to,
trying to capture the task,
circumventing product development to get to management.

These strategies made the product development team angry,
frustrated, fearful, and distrustful, and reinforced them in their
efforts to win and protect themselves.
The consequences of the cycle were wasted effort, dupli­
cated work, and delay in the recognition of problems. The
product development team could not, under these circum­

*59

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

stances, ask for help nor use it when it was offered. As the cycle
amplified, researchers and developers were less and less able
to work together. But management injected stopgap solutions.
They shifted people around and they intervened directly at mo­
ments of crisis.
The pattern was one of “ heroism under a tent.” To quote
some of the observations of the participants, “ Three people
told me not to work on Product X, but I wouldn’t stop,”
“ Don’t tell management what you’re doing,” “ Fix the problem
first, then tell them about it.”
W hat accounts for such a pattern? In order to answer this
question, we must turn to the larger context in which the research/development cycle arose. For researchers and develop­
ers were involved in a more comprehensive process which I
shall call “ the product development game.” The game has
mainly to do with four variables: corporate commitment, credi­
bility, confidence, and competence.
In order to set a new product in motion, general manage­
ment must commit the necessary resources. But management
commitment is deliberately made hard to win. This is partly
a matter of thoroughness. As one of the managers said, “ W e ’re
a very thorough company; we do our research well, and we
don’t accept just anything.” But management commitment is
also hard to win because managers tend to distrust research
and development. As one manager said, “They are likely to
flimflam and fool us if we’re not careful.” On the other hand,
managers are aware of their dependence on research and devel­
opment. They know that corporate growth depends on it.
Thus managers must commit to a process which they dis­
trust. They respond by making the commitment of resources
hard to win; and once resources are committed, they hold the
product development director wholly accountable for perform­
ance, loading him with the full burden of uncertainty. And the

260

The Art of Managing: Reflection-in-Action
maintenance of corporate commitment becomes touchier as
investment in the product increases and the company becomes
more exposed.
Under these circumstances, product development people try
to win the game by gaining and retaining management com­
mitment, while maintaining their own credibility within the
company.
A participant’s credibility behaves like a stock on the stock
market, going up or down with the perception of his success
or failure. There is a corporate market for credibility. Each per­
son strives to maintain his credibility at all costs, because a loss
of credibility can make it impossible for him to perform. As
the former head of the product development team reported,
“ W hen the problems hit the fan, my credibility was shot and
I was dead in the company.”
Confidence and competence are closely tied together. An
individual has a “ confidence tank” whose level rises or falls,
depending on his perception of his status in the company.
Credibility, commitment, confidence, and competence are
interdependent, in this sense:
“ The more credibility 1have, the more confident 1can be.”
“The more confident I am, the more confident I appear.”
“The more confident I appear, the more I am seen as credi­
ble and competent.”
Conversely,
“ If I lose credibility, I may lose confidence,”
“ If I lose confidence, I appear to be incompetent and I lose
more credibility.”
As a result, the company is full of very confident-seeming
people. It is seen as necessary to appear to be confident, no
matter what the problems are, in order to maintain credibility.
Indeed, old hands in technology management advise younger
ones along the following lines:

261

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION
'T e ll management enough of what you're doing to capture com­
mitment, but not enough to make them uneasy. Com mit yourself
to do the things that are necessary, even if you're not sure you
can do them. And do the work you see to be necessary, even if
your boss says no."

Thus heroism and secrecy (mastery and mystery) are essential
elements of the strategy for winning the product development
game.
The game yields a double bind, even for winners. It puts
the players into a situation in which they lose, eventually, what­
ever the consequences. A participant says to himself,
"I must commit to what I'm not sure I can do, in order to secure
corporate commitment. T o this end, I lay my credibility on the
line, without which I cannot function. So I must be heroic and
secretive. If I fail, I lose big. But unless I play, I cannot win."

But old-time managers say,
"If you're up, you can stay up, and it's a winnable game, because
there's plenty of resource and time and room for the redefinition
of targets, if you have the competence and the confidence. But
you must keep it up."

So product-development is a high-wire act in which you even­
tually fall. Moreover, you don't whine or complain, because
you would be seen to lack confidence. The effect is to put
product development directors, those who occupy the pivotal
position between general managers and the laboratory, under
a great deal of strain. They strive to protect their own credi­
bility, keeping problems “ under a tent," with the result that
in midstream, problems tend to be ignored. In order to retain
corporate commitment, the product is changed as little as
possible. Once a problem has been exposed, however, they

262

The Art of Managing: Reflection-in-Action
“ climb all over it.” And they strive to retain ownership of the
task, which makes them treat offers of help as though they
were threats to security.
In the light of this product development game, most of the
questions with which the case study began can be given plausi­
ble answers. It is clear why problems encountered in midstream
tend to be ignored until they are unavoidable, and it is also
clear why, upon unavoidable exposure, they are “ oversolved.”
It is clear how the corporation bails itself out of its crises,
through stopgap “ patching” solutions which resolve the crisis
at hand without affecting the underlying processes that pro­
duce crises. It is also clear how product development directors
are placed under extraordinary stress, which might well cause
them to “ bum out.”
Considered more broadly as an organizational learning sys­
tem, the product development game determines the directions
and the limits of reflection-in-action. W hen crises present
themselves, managers subject them to inquiry— often with suc­
cessful results— but they do not reflect publicly on the pro­
cesses which lead to such crises, for this would surface the
games of deception by which product development deals with
general management. W hile these games are “ open secrets”
within the organization, they are not publicly discussable.
Managers reflect on the strategies by which product develop­
ment can be made into a “ winnable game” . But neither gen­
eral managers nor product development directors reflect on the
Model I theories-in-use which create the conditions for the
game. All participants try to achieve their objectives as they
see them: general managers, to keep the burden of uncertainty
on the shoulders of product development; product develop­
ment directors, to retain corporate commitment while main­
taining their own credibility. Each participant tries to protect
himself unilaterally from being tagged with failure and from

263

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

the resulting loss of credibility. Each seeks to gain unilateral
control over the situation, to win and avoid losing in a situation
he perceives as irretrievably win/lose. And each one withholds
negative information from the other, as long as he believes it
is a winning strategy to do so. Participants may be aware of
these strategies, particularly as they are evinced by other play­
ers in the game, but they do not subject them to public reflec­
tion-in-action. To do so would be to make oneself vulnerable
in an intensely win/lose world and, in the context of the prod­
uct development game, might look like a failure of confidence.
This is not to say, however, that members of the organiza­
tion are not able to recognize the game when it is described
for them. W hen the results of the study of Product X were
presented to those who had been involved in the story, there
was a generally favorable reaction. Although most participants
had never put the whole picture together for themselves, they
recognized its validity. Some were highly amused. They
seemed to feel that the study elaborated the open secret with
which they were all familiar. But with very few exceptions, they
did not believe that the system was susceptible to change. The
risks seemed too great, the stakes too high, and the chances
of success too low.

The Art of Managing and Its Limits
Returning now to the questions with which we began this
chapter, let us consider the lessons that may be drawn from
the several examples of managerial practice which have occu­
pied our attention.
It is clear that managers do sometimes reflect-in-action. Be­
ginning with questions like, W hat do consumers really see in

264

The Art of Managing: Reflection-in-Action
our product? W hat's really going on underneath the signs of
trouble in our organization? or W hat can we learn from our
encounters with the competition? managers sometimes try to
make sense of the unique phenomena before them. They sur­
face and question their intuitive understandings; and in order
to test their new interpretations, they undertake on-the-spot
experiments. Not infrequently, their experiments yield surpris­
ing results that cause them to reformulate their questions.
They engage in reflective conversations with their situation.
The reflection-in-action of managers is distinctive, in that
they operate in an organizational context and deal with organi­
zational phenomena. They draw on repertoires of cumulatively
developed organizational knowledge, which they transform in
the context of some unique situation. And as they function as
agents of organizational learning, they contribute to the store
of organizational knowledge. G's inquiry into production de­
lays becomes a corporate exemplar for diagnosis of the troubles
of the internal environment. In the consumer products firm,
managers build up a corporate repertoire of cases, maxims, and
methods which becomes accessible to new generations of man­
agers.
But managers function as agents of organizational learning
within an organizational learning system, within a system of
games and norms which both guide and limit the directions
of organizational inquiry. The case of Product X reveals a learn­
ing system that creates a pattern of corporate crises and at the
same time prohibits public reflection-in-action on their causes.
As a consequence, the organizational learning system be­
comes immune to reflection-in-action. It is not publicly discuss­
able; and because managers do not discuss it, they are often
unable to describe it— although they may recognize the de­
scriptions constructed by an outsider to the organization. Pub­
lic discussion of the product development game would reveal
265

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

the strategies by which general managers distance themselves
from the uncertainties inherent in product development and
the complementary strategies by which technical personnel
protect themselves against the loss of corporate commitment.
T o reveal these strategies publicly, in an actual present instance
where some action might be taken, would violate the norms
of the product development game and would carry a perceived
risk of vulnerability and loss of control.
Thus organizational learning systems, of the sort revealed
by the case of Product X, become diseases that prevent their
own cure. Managers could not extend the scope of reflectionin-action to their own learning systems without transforming
the theories of action which they bring to their lives within
the organization. And these, under the normal conditions of
corporate life, are also immune to reflection-in-action.
W e might begin to heal the split in the field of management
if we were to recognize that the art of management includes
something like science in action. W hen practicing managers
display artistry, they reveal their capacity to construct models
of unique and changing situations, to design and execute onthe-spot experiments. They also reveal a capacity to reflect on
the meanings of situations and the goals of action. A more com­
prehensive, useful, and reflective management science could
be built by extending and elaborating on what skillful managers
actually do. Practitioners might then become not only the users
but the developers of management science.
But extending and elaborating on artistry means reflecting
on artistry and its limits, that is, on the ways in which managers
do reflect-in-action and on the theories-in-use and organiza­
tional learning systems that constrain them.

266

9
Patterns and Limits of
Reflection-in-Action
Across the Professions

Having considered a sample of professional fields and having
studied episodes of reflection-in-action in each of them, we are
now in a position to return to two of the questions with which
we began this study:
1.
2.

W hat are the patterns of similarity and difference in reflec­
tion-in-action across professional fields?
W hat have we learned about the limits to reflection-in-action?

267

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

Constancy and Variation
I have tried in Part II to show how practitioners in very differ­
ent sorts of professions reveal an underlying similarity in the
art of their practice, and especially in the artful inquiry by
which they sometimes deal with situations of uncertainty, in­
stability, and uniqueness. This is the pattern of reflection-inaction which I have called “ reflective conversation with the
situation.” In chapter 5, 1showed how architectural designing
and psychotherapy can both be seen as variations on this under­
lying process, and in the subsequent chapters on the sciencebased professions, planning, and management, I have de­
scribed what I take to be versions of the same process.
In all of these examples, inquiry begins with an effort to solve
a problem as initially set. In some cases, the initial problem
is framed as a problem of making something (a semiconductor
amplifier, a higher-absorbency paper product); in some cases,
it is framed as a problem of understanding something (why a
traditional industrial process works, the sources of malnourishment). However the problem is initially set, in the later stages
of inquiry both making and understanding interests come into
play.
The inquirer remains open to the discovery of phenomena,
incongruent with the initial problem setting, on the basis of
which he reframes the problem. Thus, the discovery of a new
metal-coloring process, which also works, leads to a new ques­
tion, “ How to account for the effectiveness of both the tradi­
tional and the new processes?” As the Bell Laboratory scien­
tists tested Bardeen’s theory of surface-state “ electron traps,”
they observed an unexpected amplifying effect which they saw
as requiring a new explanation. Having constructed his initial
nutrient flow model, and having discovered the problems of

268

Patterns and Limits of Reflection-in-Action
implementing it, Wilson v/as led to ask how community mem­
bers themselves could be helped to treat reduction of malnourishment as an experimental task. Product development re­
searchers,

seeking

higher-absorbency

paper

products,

discovered phenomena which led them to recast the develop­
ment target from high “ absorption capacity” to “ high rate of
absorption.”
Thus, in all of these examples, inquiry, however it may ini­
tially have been conceived, turns into a frame experiment.
W hat allows this to happen is that the inquirer is willing to
step into the problematic situation, to impose a frame on it,
to follow the implications of the discipline thus established,
and yet to remain open to the situation’s back-talk. Reflecting
on the surprising consequences of his efforts to shape the situa­
tion in conformity with his initially chosen frame, the inquirer
frames new questions and new ends in view.
In this shared pattern of inquiry there are two critically im­
portant processes, which I have also noted in my comparison
of Quist’s designing and the Supervisor’s psychotherapeutic in­
terpreting. Faced with some phenomenon that he finds
unique, the inquirer nevertheless draws on some element of
his familiar repertoire which he treats as exemplar or as genera­
tive metaphor for the new phenomenon. So Wilson thought
of the malnourishment process in terms of nutrient flow, and
the product researchers saw the synthetic-bristle paintbrush as
a pump. Further, as the inquirer reflects on the similarities he
has perceived, he formulates new hypotheses. But he tests
these hypotheses by experimental actions which also function
as moves for shaping the situation and as probes for exploring
it. In the later examples, as in Quist’s designing, the reflective
conversation includes and depends upon this threefold transac­
tional experimenting.
I have so far stressed similarities of pattern in the various

269

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

arts of reflective professional practice, but there are also impor­
tant differences. These go beyond the familiar distinctions be­
tween “ hard” and “ soft” professions, “ helping professions”
and “ mechanical arts,” “ learned professions” and “ profession­
alizing occupations.” I have in mind differences in the con­
stants that various practitioners bring to their reflection-inaction:
•
•
•
•

the media, languages, and repertoires that practitioners use to
describe reality and conduct experiments
the appreciative systems they bring to problem setting, to the
evaluation of inquiry, and to reflective conversation
the overarching theories by which they make sense of phenom­
ena
the role frames within which they set their tasks and through
which they bound their institutional settings.

In calling these things constants, I do not mean to suggest
that they are absolutely unchanging. They do change, some­
times in response to reflection, but at a slower rate than theo­
ries of particular phenomena or frames for particular problem­
atic situations. Hence they give the practitioner the relatively
solid references from which, in reflection-in-action, he can
allow his theories and frames to come apart. Indeed, depending
on the robustness of these constants, practitioners are more or
less able to recognize and engage that which is shifting and
turbulent in their practice. And depending on differences in
these constants, taken individually and as whole patterns, we
can account for significant differences in reflection-in-action
within and across the professions.
Although it would be beyond the scope of this book to pur­
sue this line of inquiry very far, I would like in a few paragraphs
to suggest how it might be pursued.
2JO

Patterns and Limits of Reflection-in-Action
W hat does it matter that the medium of reflection-in-action
is the architect’s sketchpad, the relation between patient and
therapist, the drawings and experimental models of an engi­
neering laboratory, the dialogue of planner and developer, or
the interactive relations among managers in a corporation?
Media cannot really be separated in their influence from lan­
guage and repertoire. Together they make up the “ stuff” of
inquiry, in terms of which practitioners move, experiment, and
explore. Skills in the manipulation of media, languages, and
repertoires are essential to a practitioner’s reflective conversa­
tion with his situation, just as skill in the manipulation of spo­
ken language in essential to ordinary conversation.
Quist’s designing depends on his feel for the sketchpad and
the scale model, and for the drawing/talking language in which
he works. Similarly, the engineers’ experimental designing de­
pends on their feel for the behavior of metals under varying
conditions of temperature, exposure to air, or immersion in
water. For Wilson, the Supervisor, the town planner, the man­
agers, media are kinds of social fields. Because they have devel­
oped a feel for the media and languages of their practices, the
individuals we have studied can construct virtual worlds in
which to carry out imaginative rehearsals of action. Because
of the importance of this feel for media and language, an expe­
rienced practitioner cannot convey the art of his practice to
a novice merely by describing his procedures, rules, and theo­
ries, nor can he enable a novice to think like a seasoned practi­
tioner merely by describing or even demonstrating his ways of
thinking. Because of the differences in feel for media, lan­
guage, and repertoire, the art of one practice tends to be
opaque to the practitioners of another, obscuring such underly­
ing similarities as 1 have outlined above.
W e know very little about the ways in which individuals de271

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

velop the feel for media, language, and repertoire which shapes
their reflection-in-action. This is an intriguing and promising
topic for future research.
Constancy of appreciative system is an essential condition
for reflection-in-action. It is what makes possible the initial
framing of the problematic situation, and it is also what per­
mits the inquirer to reappreciate the situation in the light of
its back-talk. Thus Quist’s valuing of coherent design, nooks
and soft back areas, artifices, and the softening of hard-edged
forms makes it possible for him both to give his initial framing
of the problem of the design of the school and to reframe that
problem in the light of his discovery of the meaning of the gal­
lery. And W ilson’s valuing of experimental modelling, trying
things out, finding things out for oneself, seeing connections
between apparently disparate phenomena, showing up the de­
fects of an orthodox view, underlies both his initial framing
of the malnourishment problem in terms of the nutrient flow
model and his later reframing of it in terms of communitybased Cogwheel Experiments. If, in the midst of such inquiries
as these, there were a sudden shift of appreciative system, in­
quiry would no longer have the character of a reflective conver­
sation. It would become a series of disconnected episodes.
It is also because of the constancy of his appreciative system
that an inquirer engaged in on-the-spot experiment can tell
when he is finished. He bounds his experimenting by his appre­
ciation of the changes he has wrought.
Overlap in appreciative system has much to do with the
shape of professional communities of inquiry, and differences
of appreciative system have much to do with differences in reflection-in-action both across professions and within them.
Partly because of such differences, architects from different
schools will approach the same site and program in very differ­
ent ways and produce dissimilar products, even though their

2J2

Patterns and Limits of Reflection-in-Action
design processes may conform in broad outline to my descrip­
tion of Quist’s designing. Similarly, different planners, manag­
ers, or systems engineers may enter what would seem to an out­
sider to be the same situation and carry out very different
inquiries, leading to different kinds of results, even though they
are all engaged in reflective conversation with the situation.
This variability, partly rooted in difference of appreciative sys­
tem, leads to a special version of the problem of objectivity.
W ithin a process of inquiry, evaluations of methods and prod­
ucts may be objective in the sense that they are independent
of mere opinion. Across processes of inquiry, differences in
evaluation may not be objectively resolvable. Resolution of
such differences depends on the little-understood ability of in­
quirers to enter into one another’s appreciative systems and to
make reciprocal translations from one to the other.1
Quist has access to special theories of building structures,
soil conditions, and the circulation of people through spaces.
The engineers working on the gun-coloring problem have ac­
cess to theories of the surface properties of metals. Both Quist
and the engineers can apply their special theories to particular
instances so as to derive a rule for the prediction or control
of the phenomena at hand. Quist can use his structural theo­
ries, for example, to figure out the minimum dimensions of a
beam that must carry a given load. But neither Quist nor the
engineers appear to have access to what I have called overarch­
ing theories. An overarching theory does not give a rule that
can be applied to predict or control a particular event, but it
supplies language from which to construct particular descrip­
tions and themes from which to develop particular interpreta­
tions. Psychoanalytic theory functions in this way for the Su­
pervisor, and process-flow modelling does so for Wilson. In
both cases, the practitioner does not consider that he has
formed a satisfactory account of phenomena in any practice

273

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

situation until he has framed it in terms of his overarching the­
ory.
If a practitioner has such a theory, he uses it to guide his
reflection-in-action. The nature of the reflective conversation
varies, from profession to profession and from practitioner to
practitioner, depending on the presence or absence, and on the
content, of overarching theory.
In the several cases we have examined, we have observed
how practitioners frame their roles. In one case, the town plan­
ner’s, we have traced the consequences of role-frame for the
system of knowing-in-practice. Because role-frame remains rel­
atively constant from situation to situation, it bounds the scope
of practice and provides a reference which allows a practitioner
to build a cumulative repertoire of exemplars, facts, and de­
scriptions.
Differences in role frame help to determine what knowledge
is seen as useful in practice and what kinds of reflection are
undertaken in action. Consider, to take a particularly impor­
tant example, how practitioners treat their institutional con­
texts. All professional roles are embedded in an institutional
context, but not all practitioners take it seriously. A mechanical
engineer may see himself as a technical problem solver, treating
his relations with his clients as an unavoidable but essentially
nonprofessional activity. Or, like Wilson, he may frame his
tasks in such a way that a larger social context moves to the
foreground and technical problem solving becomes a piece of
the larger social puzzle. If institutional context occupies a cen­
tral place in a practitioner’s role frame, then he pays attention
to phenomena for which there is no satisfactory off-the-shelf
theory. He must construct a theory of his own. And if he treats
his theory of the context as an object of reflection (as the town
planner does only to a slight extent), then he will perceive that
others in the situation meet his frames and theories with
274

Patterns and Limits of Reflection-in-Action
frames and theories of their own. He will see them not only
as objects to be planned for but as planners in their own right,
and his interaction with them will take the form of a reflective
conversation.
In these ways, among others, differences in the constants
brought to inquiry affect the scope and direction of reflectionin-action. But the constants— media, language, repertoire, ap­
preciative system, overarching theory, and role frame— are also
subject to change. They tend to change over periods of time
longer than a single episode of practice, although particular
events may trigger their change. And they are sometimes
changed through the practitioner’s reflection on the events of
his practice. T he study of these sorts of reflection, crucial both
to professional development and to the epistemology of prac­
tice, would require a more sustained longitudinal analysis than
any I have attempted in the chapters of this book.

The Limits of Reflection-in-Action
W hat is it that constrains our ability to reflect-in-action? T o
what extent are such constraints inherent in the human situa­
tion or in the epistemology of practice, and to what extent can
we learn to transcend them?
Our examples suggest that practitioners do frequently think
about what they are doing while doing it. In professional prac­
tice, reflection-in-action is not a rare event. On the other hand,
we have also seen how systems of knowing-in-practice may
limit the scope and depth of reflection.
The first finding disconfirms the rather widespread belief
that thinking must interfere with doing. The second draws at­
tention to the self-limiting character of knowing-in-practice,
2 75

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

both in individuals and organizations, and suggests the direc­
tions in which such limits might be extended.
According to conventional wisdom, thinking interferes with
doing in two ways. First, artistry being indescribable, reflec­
tion on action is doomed to failure; and second, reflection-in­
action paralyzes action. Both arguments are largely, though not
entirely, mistaken. They owe their plausibility to the persis­
tence of misleading views about the relation of thought to ac­
tion.
As to the first argument, I have already noted that “ artistry”
has two meanings. It may designate intuitive knowing, like the
intuitive judgments of a skilled craftsman or the intuitive theories-in-action of an expert block balancer. It may also designate
reflection-in-action on intuitive knowing, as in Quist’s design­
ing or the Supervisor’s interpreting. In both of these senses,
artistry is describable. W hen practitioners reflect-in-action,
they describe their own intuitive understandings. And it is pos­
sible to describe reflection-in-action itself, as I have done in
the previous chapters.
It is true, nevertheless, that there is always a gap between
such descriptions and the reality to which they refer. W hen
a practitioner displays artistry, his intuitive knowing is always
richer in information than any description of it. Further, the
internal strategy of representation, embodied in the practition­
er’s feel for artistic performance, is frequently incongruent
with the strategies used to construct external descriptions of
it. Because of this incongruity, for example, people who do
things well often give what appear to be good descriptions of
their procedures which others cannot follow. Everyone who
has tried to learn from a book how to ski or write a story knows
how difficult it can be to act from such a description.
But the gap between artistry and its description need not
obstruct reflection-in-action. In such examples as Quist’s re-

2j6

Patterns and Limits of Reflection-in-Action
flection on Petra’s framing of the problem of the site or the
block balancer’s reflection on his geometric center theory of
balancing, the description of intuitive knowing feeds reflec­
tion, enabling the inquirer to criticize, test, and restructure his
understandings. Incompleteness of description is no impedi­
ment to reflection. On the contrary, anything like a complete
description of intuitive knowing would produce an excess of
information. Nor is it a fatal impediment that reflection-inaction converts one’s intuitive feel for performance to knowledge-in-practice which involves a different strategy of represen­
tation. Reflection-in-action does not depend on a description
of intuitive knowing that is complete or faithful to internal rep­
resentation. Although some descriptions are more appropriate
to reflection-in-action than others, descriptions that are not
very good may be good enough to enable an inquirer to criticize
and restructure his intuitive understandings so as to produce
new actions that improve the situation or trigger a reframing
of the problem.
Even if reflection-in-action is feasible, however, it may seem
dangerous. The baseball pitcher who claims never to think
about his pitching in the midst of a game, and the famous story
of the centipede paralyzed by the attempt to explain how he
moves, suggest that reflection interferes with action. It may
seem to do so for four different reasons:
1.
2.

3.

There is no time to reflect when we are on the firing line; if
we stop to think, we may be dead.
W hen we think about what we are doing, we surface complex­
ity, which interferes with the smooth flow of action. T h e com­
plexity that we can manage unconsciously paralyzes us when
we bring it to consciousness.
If we begin to reflect-in-action, we may trigger an infinite re­
gress of reflection on action, then on our reflection on action,
and so on ad infinitum.
277

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION
4.

The stance appropriate to reflection is incompatible with the
stance appropriate to action. As Hannah Arendt has said,

Every reflection that does not serve knowledge and is not guided
by practical needs and aims is . . . “ out of order” . . . it interrupts
any doing, any ordinary activities, no matter what they happen
to be. All thinking demands a stop-and-think . . . it is, indeed, as
though thinking paralyzed me in much the same way as an excess
of consciousness may paralyze the automatism of my bodily func­
tion.2

So understood, reflection-in-action is a contradiction in terms.
These arguments admit the possibility of reflecting on ac­
tion (even the pitcher who never “ thinks” during the game
is happy to review films of the game in the privacy and safety
of the locker-room), but they point to the dangers of reflection
in action. They contain grains of truth, but they depend on
a mistaken view of the relationship between thought and ac­
tion. Fused together in the conventional wisdom, they have
become a myth that reinforces the ever-present tendency to
mystify the art of practice.
There are indeed times when it is dangerous to stop and
think. On the firing line, in the midst of traffic, even on the
playing field, there is a need for immediate, on-line response,
and the failure to deliver it can have serious consequences. But
not all practice situations are of this sort. The action-present
(the period of time in which we remain in the “ same situa­
tion” ) varies greatly from case to case, and in many cases there
is time to think what we are doing. Consider, for example, a
physician's management of a patient's disease, a lawyer's prepa­
ration of a brief, a teacher's handling of a difficult student. In
processes such as these, which may extend over weeks, months,
or years, fast-moving episodes are punctuated by intervals
which provide opportunity for reflection.

2/8

Patterns and L im its o f R eflection-in-A ction

Even when the action-present is brief, performers can some­
times train themselves to think about their actions. In the splitsecond exchanges of a game of tennis, a skilled player learns
to give himself a moment to plan the next shot. His game is
the better for this momentary hesitation, so long as he gauges
the time available for reflection correctly and integrates his re­
flection into the smooth flow of action. And we have observed
how practitioners like architects, musicians, and therapists con­
struct virtual worlds in which the pace of action can be slowed
down and iterations and variations of actions can be tried. In­
deed, our conception of the art of practice ought to give a cen­
tral place to the ways in which practitioners learn to create op­
portunities for reflection-in-action.
The argument from the inherent complexity of intuitive
knowing raises again the question of what constitutes a good
description of action. Speaking of the centipede’s paralysis,
Seymour Papert once observed that the difficulty is not in the
inherent complexity of the material brought to consciousness
but in our ways of representing complexity. Certain descrip­
tions are more useful for action than are others. T he centipede
might have given a nonparalyzing answer to the question,
“ How do you do it?” by saying simply, “ I move forward in a
wavy motion.” A good coach learns to capture the complexity
of action in metaphor (“ Lean into the slope!” ) that helps to
convey the feel for the performance.
On the other hand, some very useful prescriptions for action
do temporarily interfere with performance. Someone learning
to play tennis or golf or a musical instrument may be asked
to change his grip (or his embouchure) with the expectation
that he will lose spontaneity for a time before recapturing it
at a higher level of quality. Here we are not surprised to find
that reflection does temporarily inhibit action. W hether or not
we are prepared to pay this price depends on our ability to find

*79

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

a context in which we can practice at low risk, or on our judg­
ment of the value of incurring a temporary loss of spontaneity.
In any case, we are most likely to initiate reflection-in-action
when we are stuck or seriously dissatisfied with our perfor­
mance. Our question then is not so much whether to reflect
as what kind of reflection is most likely to help us get unstuck.
The fear that reflection-in-action will trigger an infinite re­
gress of reflection derives from an unexamined dichotomy of
thought and action. If we separate thinking from doing, seeing
thought only as a preparation for action and action only as an
implementation of thought, then it is easy to believe that when
we step into the separate domain of thought we will become
lost in an infinite regress of thinking about thinking. But in
actual reflection-in-action, as we have seen, doing and thinking
are complementary. Doing extends thinking in the tests,
moves, and probes of experimental action, and reflection feeds
on doing and its results. Each feeds the other, and each sets
boundaries for the other. It is the surprising result of action
that triggers reflection, and it is the production of a satisfactory
move that brings reflection temporarily to a close. It is true,
certainly, that an inquirer’s continuing conversation with his
situation may lead, open-endedly, to renewal of reflection.
W hen a practitioner keeps inquiry moving, however, he does
not abstain from action in order to sink into endless thought.
Continuity of inquiry entails a continual interweaving of think­
ing and doing.
Finally, Hannah Arendt’s observation that reflection is “ out
of order” in action may seem valid or invalid depending on
the kind of reflection one has in mind. It is not hard to imagine
reflection “ not guided by practical needs and aims” which
might distract an actor or cause him to cease acting altogether.
This may appear a good or bad thing, depending on one’s view
of the action in question. Some advisors to President Johnson

280

Patterns and L im its o f R eflection -in -A ction

during the Vietnam W ar years have recorded the feeling that
in the councils of war their skeptical reflections always seemed
impractical and out of order.3 In such a case, the interruption
of action by reflection might seem heroic. In other, less dra­
matic instances, reflection incongruent with a present course
of action may be maintained through double vision. Double
vision does not require us to stop and think, but the capacity
to keep alive, in the midst of action, a multiplicity of views
of the situation. It does not interfere with action but contrib­
utes to the inquirer’s readiness for the mode of action I have
called reflective conversation with the situation.
There is nothing in reflection, then, which leads necessarily
to paralysis of action. The fear of paralysis may spring from
worst-case analysis which ignores the opportunities for reflec­
tion within the action-present, from neglect of our ability to
construct virtual worlds in which the pace of action can be
slowed down, from ignorance of double vision, from inability
to imagine descriptions useful for action, or from an inappro­
priate dichotomy of thinking and doing.
In actual practice, practitioners do, without paralysis, reflectin-action. The fear of a paralysis induced by reflection, like the
belief in the indescribability of artistry, comes not from the
experience of practice but from a lingering model of practical
rationality which is much in need of reflection.
Quite different from the mythical limits to reflection, cele­
brated in the conventional wisdom, are the self-reinforcing sys­
tems of knowing-in-practice that we have encountered in some
of our case studies of professional practice.
The town planner in our example reflects on his strategies
of problem solving but not on his problem settings or on the
role frame and theory of action from which they derive. T he
consumer product managers reflect on their organizational cri­
ses but not on the organizational learning system that fosters

281

PROFESSIONAL CONTEXTS FOR REFLECTION-IN-ACTION

crises. Their reflections operate within their systems of under­
standing. The town planner, who takes his balancing act as a
given, reflects only on the techniques best suited to its perform­
ance. The product development managers, who treat their
learning system as unchangeable, think only about the best
ways of patching it. Similarly, in the dialogues of Quist and
Petra and the Supervisor and the Resident, there is a great deal
of artistry (which involves reflection-in-action) but very little
second-order reflection either on artistry or on the interaction
between teacher and student.
It seems to me that the processes which maintain the con­
stancy of individual and organizational systems of knowing-in­
practice are also the ones that keep the art of practice mysteri­
ous. W hen a practitioner does not reflect on his own inquiry,
he keeps his intuitive understandings tacit and is inattentive
to the limits of his scope of reflective attention. The remedy
to the mystification of practice and to the constriction of re­
flection-in-action is the same: a redirection of attention to the
system of knowing-in-practice and to reflection-in-action itself.
Quist and the Supervisor should be thinking about the art that
they demonstrate for their students, and about the interactions
in which they demonstrate it. The town planner should be
thinking about his limited reflection-in-action, and about the
balancing act within which he frames his practice. The manag­
ers of the consumer products firm should be reflecting on their
patching exercises and on the organizational learning system
that requires patching.
But this is circular. W hat keeps the planner, for example,
from reflecting on his balancing act is his self-reinforcing sys­
tem of knowing-in-practice. The system makes itself immune
to reflection, thereby protecting the planner from the uncer­
tainty (and perhaps also from the paralysis) he would experi­
ence if he were to allow his system to come apart. A practi­

282

P attern s and L im its o f R eflection -in -A ction

tioner might break into a circle of self-limiting reflection by
attending to his role frame, his interpersonal theory-in-use, or
the organizational learning system in which he functions.
Whatever his starting point, however, he is unlikely to get very
far unless he wants to extend and deepen his reflection-in­
action, and unless others help him see what he has worked to
avoid seeing.
The pursuit of these questions, critical to a theory of educa­
tion for reflection-in-action, would take us well beyond the
scope of this book.

283

Part III
CONCLUSION

IO
Implications for the
Professions and Their
Place in Society

Introduction
In parts I and II of this book, I have advocated an epistemology
of practice based on the idea of reflection-in-action. I shall now
explore several of its implications— for the professional’s role
in society, his autonomy and authority in relation to his clients,
the kinds of research likely to be useful to him, the institutional
contexts conducive to reflective practice, and the visions of so­
cial progress and well-being which may be used to justify pro­
fessional activity. In considering these questions, I shall con­
trast reflective practice with the model of technical rationality
and with a more recent tradition of radical criticism of the pro-

287

CONCLUSION

fessions. The concept of professional as technical expert is
closely bound to the utopian imagery of the Technological Pro­
gram, and the radical demystification of the professions is also
linked to a utopian vision, one of liberation from the domina­
tion of established interests and professional elite. Although
the social implications of the idea of reflective practice do not
lie midway between these utopian extremes, they may be illu­
minated by the threefold comparison.
W ithin the dominant tradition which has grown up over the
past four hundred years, the professional’s claim to extraordi­
nary knowledge is rooted in techniques and theories derived
from scientific research undertaken for the most part in institu­
tions of higher learning. The status of professional experts,
their claims to social mandate, autonomy, and license, are
based on the powerful ideas of Technical Rationality and the
technological program. There is no more vivid sign of the per­
sistence of these ideas than the hunger for technique which
is so characteristic of students of the professions in this decade.
W ithin the tradition of radical criticism, the attack on pro­
fessionals as elite instruments of the establishment's combined
with a critique of Technical Rationality. Both the Technologi­
cal Program and the professional’s claim to extraordinary
knowledge are treated as mystiques. In a critical literature most
dramatically, though perhaps not most rigorously, represented
by Ivan Illich,1 the mystique of technical expertise is seen as
an instrument of social control of the have-nots— the poor, the
dispossessed, ethnic and racial minorities, women— by a social
elite. T he mandate, autonomy, and license of the technical ex­
pert work toward a distribution of social benefits which is pro­
foundly unjust, and they tend toward the creation of a techno­
cratic society in which most human beings do not want to live.
Professional expertise, when it is exposed to careful scrutiny,
dissolves into empty claims. T he professions are vehicles for

288

Im p lication s for th e P rofessions and T h eir P lace in S ociety

the preemption of socially legitimate knowledge in the interest
of social control.
These arguments are used to justify the thoroughgoing de­
mystification of the professions and to buttress either of two
remedial strategies: development of a new breed of profes­
sional advocates who will work in the interests of the power­
less client-victims of the professions, educating them to their
rights and organizing them to defend their rights; or creation
of a new breed of citizen-practitioners— citizen-planners,
citizen-builders, citizen-physicians— who will be equipped to
take over the territories of the professional experts.2
Paradoxically, it is not uncommon to discover that the very
same students of the professions who hunger for the “ hard”
technical skills which they believe will assure them of jobs in
established institutions also espouse the radical vision of demys­
tification.
But demystification of professional knowledge may have two
quite different meanings. It may consist in treating professional
knowledge as the emperor’s new clothes; or it may mean that
professionals do know something worth knowing, a limited
something that is inherently describable and, at least in some
measure, understandable by others. In this second sense, mysti­
fication consists in making knowledge-in-practice appear to be
more complex, private, ineffable, and above all more once-andfor-all, more closed to inquiry, than it needs to be. In this sense,
both professional and counter-professional may be mystifiers.
And in this sense, demystification is not a showing up of the
falsity of the practitioner’s claims to knowledge but a bid to
undertake the often arduous task of opening it up to inquiry.
Those who would demystify professional knowledge, in the
sense of showing it up, would explode the professional’s claim
to extraordinary knowledge, including its basis in scientific re­
search, and would deny his claims to mandate for social con­

289

CONCLUSION

trol, autonomy in practice, and license to keep the gates of the
professions. But I shall argue that radical critique cannot substi­
tute for (though it may provoke) the qualified professional’s
critical self-reflection. Unreflective practitioners are equally
limited and destructive whether they label themselves as pro­
fessionals or counterprofessionals.

The Professional-Client Relationship
In the social context of professional practice which is accepted
as routine in our society, the professional is a provider of ser­
vices. The names given to the recipients of service vary with
the profession. Thus lawyers, accountants, architects, and con­
sulting engineers have “ clients” ; physicians, dentists, and ther­
apists have “ patients” ; teachers have “ students” or “ advisees” ;
the recipients of the social worker’s services may be called “ cli­
ents,” “ cases,” or “ counselees.” Although these different
names often connote important shades of difference in rela­
tionship, it is customary to use “ client” as the generic term.
The professional-client relationship is essential to what is
meant in our society by a profession. This fact is supported,
rather than denied, by the existence of professions in which
it is difficult to identify those who stand in the client’s role.
In cases where the professional’s role has more to do with social
control than with help, or where the relationship between help
and control is a matter of ambiguity and debate, then it seems
paradoxical to call the objects of professional attention “ cli­
ents.” This is true of policemen, and may also be true of teach­
ers, managers, or social workers. In cases where the professional
works within a bureaucracy, as more and more professionals—
managers, engineers, architects, planners, even physicians and
2Q 0

Im p lication s for th e Professions and T heir P lace in Society

lawyers— are coming to do, then it is also paradoxical to speak
of the professional’s superiors, subordinates, or peers as clients.
Here, however, the paradox has to do with the use of “ client”
to refer to individuals who occupy roles of formal authority,
subordination, or exchange in a specialized task system. In
cases where the professional— a town planner, superintendent
of schools, or public official— occupies a position which re­
quires him to interact with many different groups, then we are
apt to speak of “ constituents” or “ stakeholders” rather than
clients.
But in all of these cases where it is paradoxical, ambiguous,
or simply inappropriate to speak of “ clients,” the matter is a
source of trouble to the members of the profession. The ab­
sence of a clearly identifiable professional-client relation has
the effect of undermining the service provider’s view of himself
as a professional. Policemen, who are apt to have strongly pro­
tective feelings about their professional status, frequently pres­
ent themselves in terms of the helping, social service dimen­
sions of their roles, in the light of which they can more readily
identify the citizens who receive their services as their clients.3
Engineers, architects, managers, and other bureaucratized pro­
fessionals are given to public debate, in the forums of their pro­
fessional societies, over the threat posed by bureaucratization
to the maintenance of their status as professionals.4 And for
planners, school principals, and organizational consultants, it
is often a matter of urgency to determine, “ W ho is the client?”
The meaning of this question is, I think, “ to whom should we
define ourselves as standing in the essential professional rela­
tionship?” for professionals must be able to offer the benefits
of their extraordinary knowledge to other individuals in rela­
tion to whom they can exercise authority and enjoy the auton­
omy to which they lay claim.5 These observations suggest what
must be some of the features essential to the traditional profes­

291

CONCLUSION

sional-client relationship, and they also suggest how that rela­
tionship may change with changes in our understanding of pro­
fessional knowledge.
The traditional professional-client relationship, linked to the
traditional epistemology of practice, can be described as a con­
tract, a set of shared norms governing the behavior of each
party to the interaction. These norms, some of which have a
formal basis in the legal system and others a basis in informal
understandings, enable professional and client to know what
they can expect from one another.
In the traditional professional-client contract, the profes­
sional acts as though he agreed to deliver his services to the
client to the limits of his special competence, to respect the
confidences granted him, and not to misuse for his own benefit
the special powers given him within the boundaries of the rela­
tionship. The client acts as though he agreed, in turn, to accept
the professional’s authority in his special field, to submit to the
professional’s ministrations, and to pay for services rendered.
In a familiar psychological extension of the informal contract,
the client agrees to show deference to the professional. He
agrees not to challenge the professional’s judgment or to de­
mand explanations beyond the professional’s willingness to
give them. In short, he agrees to behave as though he respected
the professional’s autonomy as an expert.
W ithin the bare outlines of such a contract, there are large
zones of discretionary freedom for both parties. The client may
show more or less deference, more or less compliance with the
professional’s advice, may present a greater or lesser challenge
to the professional’s opinions. In turn, the professional may
show more or less sympathy with the client’s problems, evince
more or less effort at understanding his situation, reveal more
or less of the special knowledge available to him, all of which
may depend on the professional’s perception of the client’s sta­

292

Im plications for th e Professions and T h eir P lace in Society

tus, his ability to pay, or on prior relations of friendship or obli­
gation.
Under the traditional contract, the professional’s account­
ability for his performance is mainly to his professional peers.
He is, of course, directly accountable to his client; but often
the client has limited ability to determine whether or not legiti­
mate expectations have been met. The professional’s account­
ability within the legal system arises only on the occasion of
claims of an egregious violation of contract, as in a medical mal­
practice suit. W ithin the broader range of accountability, short
of a possible violation of the law, it is the professional’s peers
who are best equipped to determine whether he has performed
satisfactorily within his contract. But the professional-client re­
lationship is usually characterized by privacy and there are
often no routinely available means for a professional’s peers to
get access to his performance. The failure of institutional
mechanisms of accountability have contributed a great deal to
the current disenchantment with the professions, for example,
in the nursing home scandals, the well-publicized abuses of
Medicare, and the behavior of some lawyers in the Watergate
affair. It is true that in these highly public scandals, outrage
at the violation of professional norms is triggered by their expo­
sure, which suggests that some mechanism of accountability
is working. There is, nevertheless, a widespread worry that the
relatively rare instances of public exposure signal a far wider
pattern of violation of the professional contract, which existing
mechanisms of accountability are insufficient to reveal or
correct.
The prototypical examples of the contract which I have
called traditional are the physician’s relation to his patients and
the lawyer’s to his clients. These are the cases in which the
status, authority, and autonomy of the professional are most
secure. In Glazer’s minor professions— the ministry, teaching,

293

CONCLUSION

social work, for example— the traditional professional-client
contract may be deficient in one or more of the features de­
scribed above. Even in these cases, however, the professional
often takes the physician’s or lawyer’s relation to his client as
a norm and tries to emulate it.
The radical criticism of the professions carries significant im­
plications for the professional-client contract. Because the radi­
cal critic denies the legitimacy of the professional’s authority
and of the client’s submission to it, he rejects a fundamental
element of the traditional contract. He would place client and
professional in an essentially adversarial relationship. Insistence
on the rights of patient, prisoner, or welfare recipient is a way
of establishing the client’s adversarial equality to the profes­
sional, empowering him to resist the professional’s efforts to
control him. T h e movement to create “ citizen professionals,”
on the other hand, is an effort to replace the professional-client
contract by a new contract in which exchanges of service and
remuneration would occur between laymen.
But these remedies carry defects of their own. W hen advo­
cates organize clients to defend their rights against excessive
professional control, the organized advocacy and the adver­
sarial process may become as controlling and as unreflective
as traditional professional practice at its worst. Poverty lawyers
who construe the housing problem as one of “ getting the land­
lords off the tenants’ backs” may provide a legitimate defense
against exploitation of the powerless, but they may also gener­
ate a militant orthodoxy which ignores the deeper causes of
the housing problem and may even worsen tenants’ lot over
the long run, causing landlords to abandon properties and re­
duce the stock of available housing. Citizen healthworkers,
planners, or builders may serve as a useful corrective to the ex­
cesses of doctrinaire or peremptory professionals; but they may
also make a virtue of ignorance, paying insufficient attention

294

Im plications for th e P rofessions and T heir P lace in S ociety

to the legitimate parts of the professional’s claims to extraordi­
nary knowledge, misleading their clients. The defects of such
measures seem to hinge on one or another of two issues. First,
there is the difficulty of combining an adversarial stance toward
the professional with a wish to benefit from his special knowl­
edge. And second, there is the sense in which a professional
advocate or citizen-professional still takes a professional stance,
claiming special knowledge and autonomy which he may abuse
in his relations with his clients.
W hat, then, does the idea of reflective practice imply for
the nature of the professional-client contract?
It is important to note, first of all, that reflective practice
does not free us from the need to worry about client rights and
mechanisms of professional accountability. M y concern is to
show how the professional-client contract may be transformed,
within a framework of accountability, when the professional
is able to function as a reflective practitioner.
Just as reflective practice takes the form of a reflective con­
versation with the situation, so the reflective practitioner’s rela­
tion with his client takes the form of a literally reflective con­
versation. Here the professional recognizes that his technical
expertise is embedded in a context of meanings. He attributes
to his clients, as well as to himself, a capacity to mean, know,
and plan. He recognizes that his actions may have different
meanings for his client than he intends them to have, and he
gives himself the task of discovering what these are. He recog­
nizes an obligation to make his own understandings accessible
to his client, which means that he needs often to reflect anew
on what he knows. If he is a physician, to take one example,
he may urge his patient to stop smoking, but he may also be
alert to discover whether, in this patient’s life, smoking is a
way of handling a level of stress that might have other serious
consequences if it were given up. If he has a patient with leuke­

295

CONCLUSION

mia who never mentions her disease by name, he may explore
the meaning of her failure to utter the dread word; and if he
discovers that she has been unable to accept the reality of her
disease, he may work with her to say the word, and then to
understand the varieties of leukemia and the place of her own
version of it in the overall pattern of the disease. In this sort
of example, and in the examples of reflective teaching, manag­
ing, and therapy which I have given earlier, there is the recog­
nition that one’s expertise is a way of looking at something
which was once constructed and may be reconstructed; and
there is both readiness and competence to explore its meaning
in the experience of the client. The reflective practitioner tries
to discover the limits of his expertise through reflective conver­
sation with the client.
Although the reflective practitioner should be credentialled
and technically competent, his claim to authority is substan­
tially based on his ability to manifest his special knowledge in
his interactions with his clients. He does not ask the client to
have blind faith in a “ black box,” but to remain open to the
evidence of the practitioner’s competence as it emerges. For
this relationship to work, however, serious impediments must
be overcome. Both client and professional bring to their en­
counter a body of understandings which they can only very par­
tially communicate to one another and much of which they
cannot describe to themselves. Hence the process of communi­
cation which is supposed to lead to a fuller grasp of one anoth­
er’s meanings and, on the client’s part, to an acceptance of the
manifest evidence of the professional’s authority can only
begin with nonunderstanding and nonacceptance— but with
a willing suspension of disbelief.6
Thus, in a reflective contract between practitioner and cli­
ent, the client does not agree to accept the practitioner’s au­
thority but to suspend disbelief in it. He agrees to join the

296

Im plications for th e P rofessions and T h eir P lace in Society

practitioner in inquiring into the situation for which the cli­
ent seeks help; to try to understand what he is experiencing
and to make that understanding accessible to the practition­
er; to confront the practitioner when he does not understand
or agree; to test the practitioner’s competence by observing
his effectiveness and to make public his questions over what
should be counted as effectiveness; to pay for services ren­
dered and to appreciate competence demonstrated. The prac­
titioner agrees to deliver competent performance to the limits
of his capacity; to help the client understand the meaning of
the professional’s advice and the rationale for his actions,
while at the same time he tries to learn the meanings his ac­
tions have for his client; to make himself readily confrontable
by his client; and to reflect on his own tacit understandings
when he needs to do so in o'der to play his part in fulfilling
the contract.
W ithin such a contract, the professional is more directly ac­
countable to his client than in the traditional contract. There
is also room here for other means of assuring accountability,
that is, for peer review, for monitoring by organized clients,
and for the “ default procedures” of public protest or litigation.
But in the reflective contract, where the professional seeks to
open his special knowledge to public inquiry, these other mech­
anisms of accountability would have to function differently.
Built as they are on an essentially adversarial structure, they
would have to be implemented so as to encourage public in­
quiry within that structure— a point to which we will return
later in this chapter.
Clearly there are serious constraints on the applicability of
the reflective contract. Its establishment is difficult and timeconsuming, and the matter at hand must seem of sufficient
importance to make the effort worthwhile. There are occa­
sions when the client wants nothing more than the notariza­

CONCLUSION

tion of a deed, or the prescription of a conventional remedy,
and to be done with it. There are also situations of crisis,
when the practitioner ought to do nothing more than the
bare task required; conversation, reflective or otherwise,
would be irrelevant.
In situations which are neither emergencies nor routine
cases, the establishment of a reflective contract is possible
and may seem worthwhile; but as compared with the tradi­
tional contract, it is difficult. The difficulty lies in the differ­
ent demands on competence, and the different sources of sat­
isfaction, that are presented both to the professional and to
the client.
Let us consider, first, the situation of the professional. W hen
he is a member of a “ major” profession, whose role carries a
strong presumption of authority and autonomy, then the prob­
lem of moving to a reflective contract involves giving up his
initial claim to authority and sharing the control of the interac­
tion with the client. W hen the professional’s initial position
is weak, when he tends to be regarded as a mere service pro­
vider rather than an authority, then the problem is reversed.
I think, for example, of the principal of a school anguished by
her inability to confront what she believes to be the unreason­
able demands of parents; of engineers in large companies who
feel coerced by the directives of general managers too ready
to sacrifice product quality or safety to immediate commercial
advantage; of human service personnel in public bureaucracies
who feel that agency procedures prevent them from attending
to the clients they are supposed to serve. It is not unusual in
such cases to find that individuals aspire to a professional status
that they are only tenuously, or partially, given. Their difficulty
in establishing a reflective contract with their clients is to ac­
quire enough voice in the situation to be able to do so.
W hether the professional occupies a position of initial

298

Im plications for th e Professions and T h eir P lace in Society

strength or weakness, the reflective contract calls for compe­
tences which may be strange to him. Whereas he is ordinarily
expected to play the role of expert, he is now expected from
time to time to reveal his uncertainties. Whereas he is ordinar­
ily expected to keep his expertise private and mysterious, he
is now expected to reflect publicly on his knowledge-inpractice, to make himself confrontable by his clients.
As the professional moves toward new competences, he gives
up some familiar sources of satisfaction and opens himself to
new ones. He gives up the rewards of unquestioned authority,
the freedom to practice without challenge to his competence,
the comfort of relative invulnerability, the gratifications of def­
erence. The new satisfactions open to him are largely those of
discovery— about the meanings of his advice to clients, about
his knowledge-in-practice, and about himself. W hen a practi­
tioner becomes a researcher into his own practice, he engages
in a continuing process of self-education. W hen practice is a
repetitive administration of techniques to the same kinds of
problems, the practitioner may look to leisure as a source of
relief, or to early retirement; but when he functions as a researcher-in-practice, the practice itself is a source of renewal.
The recognition of error, with its resulting uncertainty, can be­
come a source of discovery rather than an occasion for selfdefense.
Indeed, it can be liberating for a practitioner to ask himself,
“ W hat, in my work, really gives me satisfaction?” and then,
“ How can I produce more experiences of that kind?” For some
teachers in the M IT Teachers’ Project who asked themselves
that question for the first time, the most satisfying experiences
were ones in which they “ gave the child reason” and put them­
selves into the role of student, allowing themselves to experi­
ence and reveal the confusions they had always assumed they
were expected to suppress or keep private.

299

CONCLUSION

These differences in sources of satisfaction and demands for
competence might be expressed as follows:
Expert

Reflective Practitioner

I am presumed to know, and must

I am presumed to know, but I am not

claim to do so, regardless of my own

the only one in the situation to have

uncertainty.

relevant and important knowledge. M y
uncertainties may be a source of
learning for me and for them.

Keep my distance from the client, and

Seek out connections to the client’s

hold onto the expert's role. Give the

thoughts and feelings. Allow his

client a sense of my expertise, but

respect for my knowledge to emerge

convey a feeling of warmth and

from his discovery of it in the

sympathy as a “ sweetener."

situation.

Look for deference and status in the

Look for the sense of freedom and of

client’s response to my professional

real connection to the client, as a

persona.

consequence of no longer needing to
maintain a professional facade.

Just as the reflective contract demands different kinds of
competences and permits different sources of satisfaction for
the practitioner, so it does for the client.
For one thing, the problem of choosing a practitioner pres­
ents itself to the client in a new way. He must choose not only
on the basis of the practitioner’s reputed expertise (always a
more or less “ black box” ) but on the basis of his amenability
to the reflective contract. Is the practitioner willing to talk
about the issue at hand, to consider it from more than one
point of view, to reveal his own uncertainties? Is he interested
in the client’s perceptions of the issue? Is he open to confronta­
tion, without defensiveness? Is he willing to carry out experi­
ments on the spot and to be open about such experimenting,
including the conditions under which he would regard his
views as confirmed or refuted? W hat is his stance toward his
own knowledge? Does he claim only to ‘know,” or is he inter­

300

Im plications for th e P rofessions and T heir P lace in S ociety

ested in, rather than threatened by, alternative ways of seeing
the phenomena that do not fit his models?
It is not easy for a client to adopt these attitudes if he really
wants the security of having someone who “ knows” with the
comforting certainty of expertise. In order to choose in the way
I have just described, a client must be able to distance himself
from his own attraction to the professional mystique. And he
must develop a new kind of skill in asking questions. How, for
example, is a client to question a practitioner’s claim to knowl­
edge when the client cannot readily distinguish a reasonable
claim from one that is overblown? His problem is similar to
the problem of a manager committed to the management of
people whose technical knowledge in certain areas exceeds his
own. Some of the methods familiar to managers can be useful
to the client, for example:
•

•
•

•

“Judge the man rather than his knowledge.” Challenge him,
and see how he responds to challenge. Look for the combination
of confidence and humility, advocacy of a position, and open­
ness to inquiry which is characteristic of reflective competence.
“ Use your own ignorance.” Do not be afraid to admit igno­
rance, ask for help in understanding, and expect to get it.
“Ask for sources of risk.” Push for the limits of the other’s confi­
dence. Ask what risks are attendant on a proposed course of ac­
tion.
“ Seek out more than one view.” Assume that it is normal and le­
gitimate to compare practitioners’ approaches to a problem.
Use multiple meetings to build up a sense of the proper ques­
tions to ask and the criticisms of a particular approach that need
to be answered.

T o be able to use strategies like these effectively, the client
must have some of the good manager’s skills. He should be able
to question and confront claims to expert knowledge without
hostility, that is, without making himself the cause of the

301

CONCLUSION

other’s defensiveness. He should have a sense of the limits of
expert knowledge, which shape his expectations of the profes­
sional’s appropriate behavior at the boundaries of his expertise.
In short, the competent client should really function in
many ways as a reflective practitioner. He need not pretend
to take matters into his own hands (like the “ lay physician”
or “ citizen planner” ), but he should cultivate competence in
reflective conversation with the professional, stimulating him
to reflect on his own knowledge-in-practice.
The competences and satisfactions appropriate to clients in
the reflective contract can be summarized and contrasted with
the traditional contract roughly as follows:

Traditional Contract

Reflective Contract

1 put myself into the professional's

1 join with the professional in making

hands and, in doing this, I gain a sense

sense of my case, and in doing this I

of security based on faith.

gain a sense of increased involvement
and action.

I have the comfort of being in good

I can exercise some control over the

hands. I need only comply with his

situation. I am not wholly dependent

advice and all will be well.

on him; he is also dependent on
information and action that only I can
undertake.

I am pleased to be served by the best

I am pleased to be able to test my

person available.

judgments about his competence. I
enjoy the excitement of discovery
about his knowledge, about the
phenomena of his practice, and about
myself.

On the left hand side of the page there is the comfort and the
danger of being treated as a child. On the right, there is the
gratification, and the anxiety, of becoming an active partici­
pant in a process of shared inquiry.
For any professional or client who wishes to move from tra­

302

Im p lication s for th e P rofessions and T h eir P lace in Society

ditional to reflective contract, there is the task of reshaping the
norms and expectations which the other party brings to the
interaction. If one party to an institution wishes to begin acting
in a nontraditional way, he is apt to create new sorts of dilem­
mas for himself. Should a professional, for example, risk losing
his patient’s confidence in order to create the possibility of a
reflective contract? Should he risk exploring the client’s mean­
ings when the client might regard such exploration as an intru­
sion? Should he reveal the complexity of the situation at the
risk of frightening or confusing his client?
The way in which such risks present themselves is a function
of the sort of behavioral world in which professional and client
encounter one another. Their behavioral world may be condu­
cive to the avoidance of risks, the suppression of dilemmas, the
exercise of mystery and mastery, and in these ways may foil
a practitioner’s efforts to establish a reflective contract with his
client. But the behavioral world is an artifact which profes­
sional and client jointly create. They can change it in the direc­
tions required by the reflective contract if they have the will
and competence to do so. Indeed, one of them may initiate
such a change and gradually gain the other’s support in bring­
ing it about.
Normal professional-client behavior is what I have earlier de­
scribed as Model I. It tends to take the form of win/lose games
of control. This is true whether the professional is weak or
strong. For example, a client may feign compliance, and then
proceed, when he is out of the professional’s sphere of control,
to do what he sees fit. The client may seek to play one profes­
sional off against another, using “ second opinion” to evade
control. Or the client may impugne the professional’s expertise
in order to reduce the professional’s control. T o all of these
strategies, the “ strong” professional may respond by threaten­
ing the client who fails to comply with his advice (“ You’ll learn

303

CONCLUSION

better!” or “ You do this at your own risk!” ). Or the professional
may “ pull rank,” refusing to have anything further to do with
a client so long as he remains rebellious. The professional may
extend his claim to know beyond the limits of his expertise,
or he may use the mystery of his expert knowledge so as to en­
hance his control over the client.
Games such as these can have serious consequences. The
client may refuse to comply with the professional’s advice, in
order to show the professional that he cannot be controlled.
W hen the professional exaggerates his claim to know, he may
fail to perceive a line of inquiry which would yield new and
more effective ways of looking at the client’s situation. The pro­
fessional may misconstrue the meanings the client constructs
for the professional’s advice or treatment, with the result that
he misses an opportunity for effective intervention.
These games of control and evasion acquire additional im­
portance when the client’s situation is uncertain, unique, or
unstable; for the reflection-in-action which is essential to ap­
propriate action in situations such as these may take on the
meaning of “ weakness.” T o admit uncertainty, to make it ap­
parent that one needs to conduct experiments, may look and
feel like a loss of control when the basic theme of professionalclient interaction is a game of control and evasion.
Thus the familiar Model I world of professional-client rela­
tions tends to inhibit the professional’s capacity to reflect-inaction. This is true when merely private reflection-in-action is
called for, and is all the more true of reciprocal reflection-inaction; when, for example, the professional may wish to test
his assumptions about the client’s understandings or inten­
tions.
This type of interaction is a special case of what Argyris and
I have called a “ primary inhibitory loop.” 7 Here, conditions
of uncorrectable error reinforce, and are reinforced by, Model

304

Im plications for th e Professions and T h eir P lace in Society

I theories-in-use. W hen the situation is uncertain, vague, or
ambiguous, when the inquirer’s understandings are internally
inconsistent or incongruent, then it is difficult and may be im­
possible to detect and correct one’s errors. W hen the situation
is uncertain, for example, it is not clear what expectations one
ought to have, and therefore it is not clear what would consti­
tute an outcome mismatched to expectation. W hen one’s de­
scription of the situation is vague or ambiguous, it is not di­
rectly testable. W hen one’s system of understandings is
internally inconsistent, the very same outcome may seem an
error and not an error. And when espoused theory is incongru­
ent with theory-in-use, then an outcome may be an error in
relation to the first and a match in relation to the second.
In order to make it possible to detect and correct errors in
the situation, it is necessary to remove or reduce such condi­
tions as these. For example, if the situation is uncertain, it is
necessary to construct and test a model of it. If one’s descrip­
tions or rules are vague, it is necessary to make them precise
enough to test. But in the primary inhibitory loop uncertainty
does not lead to theory building, nor does vagueness lead to
clarification and precision. On the contrary, an experienced un­
certainty may trigger a defensive reaction in which the profes­
sional or the client denies his uncertainty. Vagueness may be
used as a vehicle for the exercise of control or for the evasion
of control. For example, a patient may deliberately keep his
description of his symptoms vague in order to foil his physi­
cian’s efforts to control his behavior. A lawyer may present his
understanding of the situation in a vague way in order to in­
crease his client’s dependence on him and make the client eas­
ier to control. A professional may use vagueness in a strategy
of mystery and mastery by which he seeks to control his client,
and the client may respond in kind with a passive, apparently
compliant version of the same strategy. Thus conditions of un­

305

CONCLUSION

correctable error stimulate Model 1 responses, and these, in
turn, tend to reinforce conditions of uncorrectable error.
Breaking into a self-reinforcing system such as this means
working at the Model 1behavioral world. It is not enough for
one party to decide, unilaterally, that he will no longer be a
party to such win/lose games. He must also work toward cre­
ation of conditions in the behavioral world which will increase
the likelihood that the other party will make a similar decision.
Either the client or the professional may initiate this work,
though the professional is in some ways better positioned to
do so. Whichever one begins, however, he will need to bring
to the interaction a theory-in-use which enables him to be free
of causal responsibility for the other’s defensiveness. For it is
defensiveness which makes it hard to surface and inquire into
the dilemmas inherent in the initial shift toward the reflective
contract.
T he professional, for example, may go beyond private assess­
ments of his client’s readiness for such a shift. He may try to
frame choices for his client. How much does the client wish
to know? T o what extent does he wish to become a participant
in the professional’s inquiry?
In conjunction with this, the professional may voice the di­
lemma he feels, stating, for example, that he wants, on the one
hand, to convey to the client his evolving understanding of the
situation, but that, on the other hand, he is concerned about
the risk of frightening or confusing the client. In doing this,
he may achieve two effects. First, he may make it easier for
the client to admit that he might well be frightened or con­
fused by such an initiative; and second, he may model a way
of acting that will help the client to surface dilemmas or nega­
tive feelings which he experiences in the situation.
A client’s initiative might take the form of offering his pic­
ture of the meaning of something the professional has done

306

Im plications for th e P rofessions and T heir P lace in S ociety

or said, asking then whether the professional had intended to
convey this meaning. Or the client may ask whether the profes­
sional would be willing to admit him into his private reflections
on the case.
There is no reason to believe that it is possible to leap from
old to new contract. Expectations are not easily transformed,
especially in the situations of stress and anxiety that character­
ize many professional-client interactions, and the competences
for reflective conversation are not acquired simply as a result
of deciding to do so. It is very likely that the shift, where it
occurs, will proceed gradually and with difficulty as profession­
als and clients increase their willingness to experiment with
new modes of interaction, increase their confidence in their
capacity to deliver the new sorts of behavior, and begin to expe­
rience the satisfactions which flow from the new contract.
On the other hand, some of the conditions favorable to the
reflective contract are already present. There are clients ready
to enter into such a contract, frustrated at the unwillingness
of professionals to abandon the traditional relationships. And
there are professionals equally frustrated at being unable to
find clients who do not expect and demand the old mystique.
In these sorts of cases, it may take very little to set the process
of change in motion.

Research and Practice
The traditional model of the proper relation of research and
practice is still very much alive. For example, it underlies Glazer’s explanation of the dilemmas of the schools of the minor
professions and Schein’s schema of professional knowledge. It
is embedded in the tendency of many professional schools to

3 °7

CONCLUSION

conceive of themselves as schools of applied science, reserving
the highest status for the scientists whose theories the more
practice-oriented faculty members are supposed to apply. It is
epitomized in medicine by the dictum that “ those who study
whole organs bow down to those who study sections, and those
who study sections bow down to those who study cells.”
In some parts of some practices— medicine, agronomy, engi­
neering, dentistry, management, for example— practitioners
can and do make use of knowledge generated by universitybased researchers. But even in these professions, and certainly
in Glazer’s “ minor” ones, large zones of practice present
problematic situations which do not lend themselves to ap­
plied science. W hat is more, there is a disturbing tendency
for research and practice to follow divergent paths.8 Practi­
tioners and researchers tend increasingly to live in different
worlds, pursue different enterprises, and have little to say to
one another. Teachers have gained relatively little from cog­
nitive psychology; political and administrative practice has
gained little from the policy sciences; and management sci­
ence has contributed relatively little to the practice of man­
agement. The divergence of research and practice exacer­
bates the practitioner’s dilemma which I have called “ rigor or
relevance,” and tempts the practitioner to force practice situ­
ations into molds derived from research.
Clearly, then, when we reject the traditional view of profes­
sional knowledge, recognizing that practitioners may become
reflective researchers in situations of uncertainty, instability,
uniqueness, and conflict, we have recast the relationship be­
tween research and practice. For on this perspective, research
is an activity of practitioners. It is triggered by features of the
practice situation, undertaken on the spot, and immediately
linked to action. There is no question of an “ exchange” be­
tween research and practice or of the “ implementation” of re­

308

Im plications for th e P rofessions and T heir P lace in S ociety

search results, when the frame- or theory-testing experiments
of the practitioner at the same time transform the practice situ­
ation. Here the exchange between research and practice is im­
mediate, and reflection-in-action is its own implementation.
Nevertheless, there are kinds of research which can be un­
dertaken outside the immediate context of practice in order
to enhance the practitioner’s capacity for reflection-in-action.
“ Reflective research,” as I shall call it, may be of four types,
each of which already exists at least in embryo. Frame analysis,
the study of the ways in which practitioners frame problems
and roles, can help practitioners to become aware of and criti­
cize their tacit frames. Description and analysis of images, cate­
gory schemes, cases, precedents, and exemplars can help to
build the repertoires which practitioners bring to unique situa­
tions. A most important kind of research has to do with the
methods of inquiry and the overarching theories of phenome­
na, from which practitioners may develop on-the-spot varia­
tions. And practitioners can benefit from research on the pro­
cess of reflection-in-action itself.
I shall consider each of these briefly, noting existing in­
stances of each, suggesting in each case the outline of an
agenda for further inquiry.
Frame analysis. A t any given time in the life of a profession,
certain ways of framing problems and roles come into good cur­
rency. W hen Quist frames the problem of the design of the
school as one of “ imposing a discipline on the screwy site,”
and when Dean Wilson frames the problem of malnourishment as one of “ gaps in a process of nutrient flow,” they bound
the phenomena to which they will pay attention. Their frames
determine their strategies of attention and thereby set the di­
rections in which they will try to change the situation, the val­
ues which will shape their practice.
W hen the town planner, in our earlier example, frames his

3°9

CONCLUSION

intermediate role in terms of a balancing act, he determines
the kinds of problems he will set in the various contexts of his
practice. The construction of a role frame is superordinate to
and longer lasting than the setting of particular problems.
W hen practitioners are unaware of their frames for roles or
problems, they do not experience the need to choose among
them. They do not attend to the ways in which they construct
the reality in which they function; for them, it is simply the
given reality. Thus, for example, a planner may take for granted
that the housing problem is one of preserving and increasing
the stock of decent housing; what else could it be? A develop­
ment economist may assume without question that the prob­
lem in a developing country is that of increasing the rate of
industrialization, the growth of gross national product, and the
pool of foreign currency available for exchange.
W hen a practitioner becomes aware of his frames, he also
becomes aware of the possibility of alternative ways of framing
the reality of his practice. He takes note of the values and
norms to which he has given priority, and those he has given
less importance, or left out of account altogether. Frame aware­
ness tends to entrain awareness of dilemmas.
W hen a professional community embodies multiple and
conflicting ideas in good currency about the frames appropriate
to the construction of problems and roles, then practitioners,
educators, and students of the profession confront such dilem­
mas. One cannot be a member of the community without tak­
ing account of them. In the field of psychotherapy, as I have
noted earlier, practitioners have to deal with a bewildering vari­
ety of “ schools.” Leston Havens has proposed that these can
be grouped into the broad categories of objective-descriptive,
interpersonal, psychoanalytic, and existential psychiatry.9 Ar­
chitects face a similar predicament. They may choose, for ex­
ample, to be “ historicists,” focussing on the development of

310

Im plications for th e P rofessions and T h eir P lace in Society

variations on historical precedents. They may identify with the
"modern movement,” which has sought to free itself from his­
torical precedent but has now become something of a tradition
in its own right. They may concentrate on building as a craft
which utilizes and gives prominence to the unique properties
of materials. They may see building as an industrial process
which calls for new technologies and for building-systems. Or
they may give primary importance to the idea of architecture
as a social process in which the users of buildings should partici­
pate in design.
Social workers may approach their tasks as clinical casework­
ers, monitors and controllers of social behavior, deliverers of
social services, advocates of the rights of their clients, or as
community organizers. Indeed, in the heady days of the 1960s,
some social workers moved sequentially through all of these
ways of framing practice roles.10 Planners, as I have men­
tioned, construct variations on the roles of policy analysis, de­
sign, advocacy, regulation, management, or mediation. In a sci­
ence-based profession like medicine, a practitioner may see
himself as a clinician devoted to the diagnosis and treatment
of the diseases of individual patients, as a practitioner of pre­
ventive medicine concerned with the larger life situations of
whole communities, or as an advocate for the rights and needs
of groups of people deprived of decent medical care.
Frame analysis may help practitioners to become aware of
their tacit frames and thereby lead them to experience the di­
lemmas inherent in professional pluralism. Once practitioners
notice that they actively construct the reality of their practice
and become aware of the variety of frames available to them,
they begin to see the need to reflect-in-action on their previ­
ously tacit frames. So Quist and the Supervisor reflect with
their students on the framing of the design or therapeutic situa­
tion; so the town planner might reflect on his balancing act.
3 11

CONCLUSION

Traditionally, the discussion of alternative frames, values,
and approaches to practice tends to appear in professional com­
munities in the mode of debate among representatives of the
contending schools of thought. There is a great deal of polemi­
cal writing, in this vein, in the literatures of such fields as archi­
tecture, psychiatry, planning, social work, and divinity. There
is also a literature of debate in such fields as law, engineering,
and medicine between practitioners of the establishment and
their radical critics. In this sort of writing, the style of commu­
nication is primarily ideological. The protagonists of the vari­
ous points of view do not reflect on their frames but act from
them, seeking to defend their own positions and attack the po­
sitions of their opponents. The readers of these literatures may
be helped to become aware of alternative points of view, but
they are not much helped to reflect on the different frames
that underlie them.
Systematic, scholarly reflection on the frames implicit in
multiple approaches to reality originates in the sociology of
knowledge, and especially in the groundbreaking work of Karl
Mannheim.11 Mannheim and his followers have attempted to
analyze how particular views of reality evolve out of the con­
crete situations of particular social groups, bearing the stamp
of the perceived interests of those groups. The sociologists of
knowledge have emphasized, for example, how class interests
and values are manifested in the ostensibly “ objective” find­
ings of philosophers, scientists, and scholars. But at least in its
early embodiments, the sociology of knowledge has been less
concerned with the realities framed within particular profes­
sions than with the frames implicit in the ideologies of politics
and political economy. And even when sociologists of knowl­
edge have more recently concerned themselves with the profes­
sions, as in the growing sociology of science, their perspective
is apt to be rather distant from the concerns of the practition­

312

Im p lication s for th e P rofessions and T h eir P lace in Society

er.12 They seem to be less interested in helping practitioners
to reflect-in-action than in pursuing the self-initiated research
agenda of their own scholarly community.
W hen analysts influenced by the sociology of knowledge at­
tempt to study the professions in a way that will be useful to
the practitioners themselves, they encounter several unavoid­
able questions. W hat sorts of frame analysis will be useful to
practitioners who wish to reflect on their own frames? W hat
message, beyond mere relativism, does the sociology of knowl­
edge offer to practitioners of a profession?
The work of Leston Havens is of particular interest in this
connection. He is a psychiatrist writing for other psychiatrists,
with the expressed aim of helping them make sense of the “ bab­
ble of voices” which bedevils their profession, and in his A p ­
proaches to the Mind, he advocates systematic eclecticism.13
He sees the contending schools of psychiatric thought as a reser­
voir of available theories, techniques, and approaches to prac­
tice, from which the practitioner should choose elements ac­
cording to the special features of the case before him. Havens
proposes that the psychiatrist master an art of psychotherapy
rather like the art of teaching described by Tolstoy in the pas­
sage I have quoted earlier. The psychotherapist should derive
from the various schools of psychiatric thought a range of tech­
niques from which he can select at will those that will help him
solve the problems presented by the particular patient.
The difficulty I find in this approach is its implicit reliance
on an unexamined idea of effectiveness. The various schools
of psychiatric thought represent different ways of framing the
therapist’s role. The existential psychiatrist differs from the
psychoanalyst not only in the techniques he employs but in
his way of conceiving what it means to be a therapist, his stance
toward the patient, and what he defines as a successful out­
come of therapy. W hen Havens speaks of selecting the ap­

3*3

CONCLUSION

proach best suited to a particular patient, he makes implicit
reference to an idea of effectiveness which is constant for all
patients. But with change of frame, the idea of effectiveness
also changes.
It may be that the schools of psychiatric thought are sources
of techniques from which practitioners of various persuasions
may benefit. On the other hand, to adopt an eclectic stance
toward psychiatric pluralism is to assume that the differences
among the schools can be dissolved, eventually, in a superordi­
nate science of psychotherapy; and for this, Havens can offer
little or no evidence. Indeed, he takes a more promising ap­
proach to the matter in a later book, Participant Observation. 14
Here he offers the reader an account of the “ interpersonal psy­
chiatry” of Harry Stack Sullivan. He does not merely describe
Sullivan’s techniques but provides a systematic picture of Sulli­
van’s way of aligning himself with the patient over against the
patient’s material, which patient and therapist will observe and
analyze together. He portrays Sullivan’s efforts to engage with
his patient in “ research projects” which help the patient to
“ raise his sights” above the narrow channel through which he
normally sees. Havens gives us an inside view of Sullivan’s
world of practice, conveying what it would be like to be this
sort of therapist. But from time to time, he shifts perspective
so as to allow us to compare Sullivan’s way of seeing and prac­
ticing with the ways of other schools.
Havens’s study of participant observation is less a compen­
dium of techniques and principles than an exercise in literary
or art criticism, one that helps the reader to walk for a while
in the writer’s or artist’s world, sharing his enterprises and
methods, seeing as he sees. It is a kind of frame-analysis which
would be very useful, indeed, not only within the special field
of psychiatry, but for all professional practitioners who wish
to engage in frame reflection.

3M

Im plications for th e Professions and T heir P lace in S ociety

In its more general form, this sort of frame analysis would
help practitioners to experience the world they would create
for themselves if they adopted a particular way of framing the
practice role. It would convey the experience of problem set­
ting and solving, the self-definitions and the definitions of suc­
cess and failure, that would be inherent in a particular choice
of role-frame. It would not furnish criteria for choice among
approaches to the profession, but it would help the practitioner
to "try on” a way of framing the practice role, getting a feeling
for it and for the consequences and implications of its adop­
tion. It would help the practitioner to understand the compe­
tences he would need, and the kind of person he would be­
come, if he framed his role in a particular way; and it would
thereby support the practitioner's efforts at frame reflection.
Repertoire-building research. W e have seen earlier that
when practice situations do not fit available theories of action,
models of phenomena, or techniques of control, they may nev­
ertheless be seen as familiar situations, cases, or precedents.
Repertoire-building research serves the function of accumulat­
ing and describing such exemplars in ways useful to reflectionin-action, and it varies from profession to profession.
Lawyers are familiar with studies of legal cases and judicial
precedents in which the researcher asks what laws, regulations,
or precepts were considered relevant to the case? By what lines
of reasoning did the judge determine which of several contend­
ing interpretations of precedents was to be used to link the
present case to the relevant law? Such cases may serve as exem­
plars in a double sense. They describe precedents to which
judges and lawyers can have access as they deal with new cases,
and they also exemplify ways of thinking about the problem
of linking knowledge of rules to particular problems of judicial
decision. It is important to note, however, that existing studies
of legal precedents and cases have tended to overlook the prac­
3 25

CONCLUSION

tice of negotiations with which many lawyers are mostly con­
cerned, the problems of client relationships, and the ethics of
legal behavior. W ith the recent attention to “ lawyering,” such
case studies are beginning to make their appearance.15
In architecture, the idea of precedent has been associated
with particular buildings like the Duomo, with collections of
buildings like the Italian hill towns, or with the devices peculiar
to a particular architect (“ an artifice, the sort of thing Aalto
might invent” ). Beyond the mere naming or showing of prece­
dents, repertoire-building research in architecture may go on
to analyze how an architect thought about the problem he
posed, the solution he found, the domains from which he drew
his language of designing. Quist’s case, as we have described
and analyzed it, might be seen as a contribution to such re­
search.
Historically, the use of case method in business education
followed its introduction into the curriculum of the Harvard
Law School; but in such institutions as the Harvard School of
Business Administration, the development of case method has
had a life of its own. Cases are developed, for example, to de­
pict the full problematic situation of a business firm, as it might
present itself to a manager. Or cases may be used to raise a
particular kind of business problem, such as a problem of esti­
mating market size. A skillful case teacher draws out critical
facts, and by a sequence of astutely chosen questions leads stu­
dents through a process of inquiry which serves both to struc­
ture the “ solution space” of the situation at hand and to dem­
onstrate a mode of thinking about business problems.
In medicine, the case histories are frequently delivered in
a conventional format which describes the patient’s complaint
and presenting symptoms, the physician’s diagnosis, including
the clinical evidence on which he based it, the treatment given,
the clinical outcomes, and the resulting prognosis. Case histo­

3l6

Im plications for th e P rofessions and T heir P lace in Society

ries of this sort, even if less formally presented, may serve as
exemplars. A physician may be helped to arrive at a diagnosis
in a new case by seeing it as a case history with which he is
familiar. But again, case histories may also be used to reveal
the physician’s process of inquiry— the way in which he per­
ceives and describes the patient, his manner of listening to the
patient’s descriptions of his complaints, the process by which
he identifies possible explanations, conceives of strategies of
diagnosis or treatment, and tests them.
Repertoire-building research is widely practiced, but tends
to focus on the starting situation, the actions taken, and the
results achieved. Such cases may usefully display linkages be­
tween features of action, outcome, and context, but they do
not reveal the path of inquiry which leads from an initial fram­
ing of the situation to the eventual outcome. Often they in­
volve a kind of historical revisionism in which the case writer
acts as though a view of the case which arose only at the end
of inquiry had been available to him from the very beginning.
W hen a case study more nearly represents the evolution of in­
quiry, it may provide the reader with exemplars in the double
sense I have described.
Research on fundamental methods of inquiry and overarch­
ing theories. This kind of research has connections to both of
those described above. A practitioner’s fundamental principles,
in the sense I have in mind, are closely connected both to his
frames and to his repertoire of exemplars. Nevertheless, it is
important to give this kind of research a place of its own. It
has to do with method and theory in a sense different from
the sense usually given to these terms under the perspective
of technical rationality.
By methods and theories fundamental to a practice, I mean
those that some practitioners have learned to use as spring­
boards for making sense of new situations which seem, at first

3 ^7

CONCLUSION

glance, not to fit them. In this sense, an overarching theory
and a generic method of inquiry which is inseparable from it
are used to restructure a situation so that, eventually, one can
validly say that the theory fits the situation.
Dean W ilson’s use of process-flow models and the Supervi­
sor’s use of psychoanalytic theory are cases in point. Wilson’s
process-flow model consists of a set of ideas about processes,
a belief that any situation can be understood in terms of pro­
cess, and a family of methods for the measurement, descrip­
tion, and quantitative analysis of processes. T o understand malnourishment in children in terms of process flow required a
feat of imaginative restructuring. It was necessary to invent and
test methods of measurement so that processes resulting in
malnourishment could be described in terms of successive op­
erations performed on nutrients and the losses incurred with
each such operation. Similarly, the Supervisor could use his un­
derstanding of psychoanalytic theory to describe the patient’s
material, as recounted by the Resident, in terms of an underly­
ing psychodynamic model of inner conflicts that give rise to
self-defeating behavior.
In both cases, the theory and its associated method are used
to restructure what is going on so that the practitioners can
explain it. Indeed, this kind of restructuring is what he means
by explanation. Moreover, the restructured material lends itself
to the kind of intervention that the practitioner is good at un­
dertaking.
Research on such fundamental theories and methods may
be of two kinds. Researchers may try to discover how this pro­
cess of recognition and restructuring works by examining epi­
sodes of practice, as we have examined the practices of Wilson
and the Supervisor. This sort of research may help other practi­
tioners to enter into a way of seeing, restructuring, and inter­
vening which they may wish to make their own.

318

Im p lication s for th e Professions and T heir P lace in S ociety

In the second sense, research on fundamental theories and
methods would take the form of an “ action science.” An action
science would concern itself with situations of uniqueness, un­
certainty, and instability which do not lend themselves to the
application of theories and techniques derived from science in
the mode of technical rationality. It would aim at the develop­
ment of themes from which, in these sorts of situations, practi­
tioners may construct theories and methods of their own.
The idea of an action science has a precursor in the work
of Kurt Lewin, much of which has the thematic character
which enables practitioners to use it in their own reflection-inaction. Such notions as “ gatekeeper roles,” “ democratic and
authoritarian group climates,” and “ unfreezing” are metaphors
from which managers, for example, can build and test their
own on-the-spot theories of action. In his Inner Contradictions
of Rigorous Research, 16 Chris Argyris speaks of the “ optimal
fuzziness” of ideas such as these, and contrasts their useful im­
precision with the unusable precision of the research of certain
students of Lewin who have attempted to convert his meta­
phors to their image of social science. W hen “ democratic cli­
mate” is translated into multiple factors, variously correlated
with other factors, it ceases to be an idea useful for action.
Argyris and William Torbert,17 among others, have ad­
vanced the idea of an action science in the domain of social
psychology. But in very different domains the idea has also had
its protagonists. Britt Harris, a well-known developer of com­
puter simulations for urban planning, has recently proposed
that such models should no longer be considered as theories
which predict or explain urban phenomena (functions they
have generally failed to fulfill) but as metaphors from which
urban planners and policy makers may construct their own ac­
counts of unique and changing situations.18 Harris’s proposed
shift from model to metaphor reflects his awareness of the com­

3*9

CONCLUSION

plexity, instability, and uniqueness of the urban phenomena
with which formal modellers have concerned themselves since
World W ar II. It reflects the sense that, although formal mod­
ellers may have failed to produce precise and generalizable rep­
resentations of such phenomena as patterns of urban growth,
their models may serve, nevertheless, as ways of seeing useful
to planners and policy makers confronted with concrete situa­
tions of action.
Some urban planners already use models in the way Harris
proposes, just as Wilson uses the idea of process flow, the Su­
pervisor uses the idea of “ inner conflicts,” and some managers
and consultants use the Lewinian ideas of “ gatekeeper,” “ dem­
ocratic group climate,” and “ unfreezing.” In its further devel­
opment action science would explore, in as many different do­
mains as are of interest to practitioners, such questions as these:
W hat are the features of the themes, metaphors, and fuzzy
propositions of action science which make them usable in re­
flection-in-action? W hat kinds of evidence are appropriate to
their development prior to their use in action, and how ought
we to relate such evidence of on-the-spot experiment? W hat
are the norms of rigor appropriate to action science?
The development of action science cannot be achieved by
researchers who keep themselves removed from contexts of ac­
tion, nor by practitioners who have limited time, inclination,
or competence for systematic reflection. Its development will
require new ways of integrating reflective research and prac­
tice.
Research on the process of reflection-in-action. In the Piagetian block-balancing experiments which I have described, the
authors studied the conditions under which some children
were able to respond to the surprising behavior of the offweighted blocks by restructuring their theories-in-action. The
shift from geometric-center to center-of-gravity theories was

320

Im plications for th e Professions and T heir P lace in S ociety

found, for example, to depend on the children’s apprehension
of patterns of error and on a subtle shift of attention from suc­
cess in block balancing to exploration of the properties of the
blocks.
In the M IT Teachers’ Project, which I have also mentioned,
the project leaders wanted to encourage the teachers to reflectin-action. They hypothesized that as teachers began to get in
touch with their own intuitive understandings of such phe­
nomena as tune building and the apparent movements of the
moon, they would also learn to attend to their students’ intu­
itive understandings and would begin to think in new ways
about the collision of those understandings with the privileged
knowledge of the school.
As they tried to promote the teachers’ reflection-in-action,
they became aware of things that fostered or impeded it. They
noted the fixed, stereo-typical categories (“ he doesn’t know his
number facts,” “ he hasn’t learned to think abstractly” ) with
which some teachers first explained the students’ behavior.
They found that the teachers were inhibited in their efforts
to conduct experiments by their feelings of shame and vulnera­
bility over what they saw as poor performance. They noted that
certain powerful ideas, such as the idea of “ giving the child
reason,” enabled the teachers to become curious about behav­
ior which might be otherwise dismissed with peremptory judg­
ments. They observed that by the very act of describing their
understanding of a task, the teachers could sometimes restruc­
ture it.
In work Chris Argyris and I have done with students at­
tempting to reflect on their interpersonal theories of action,
we have been struck by phenomena similar to these, including
especially the role played by fear of failure.19 Individuals who
want to experiment with the theory of action we have called
Model II are sometimes able to invent strategies consistent

321

CONCLUSION

with it. Nevertheless, between their invention of a new strategy
of action and their attempt to produce it, they are often de­
railed by the intrusion of familiar, patterned responses. These
"automatic intercepts" seem to serve the function of protect­
ing the individual from exposure to failure, but they also assure
his continued performance according to familiar routines.
These vignettes of research on the process of reflection-in­
action suggest that researchers must take account of the inter­
weaving of cognitive, affective, and group dynamic effects. As
we try to understand the nature of reflection-in-action and the
conditions that encourage or inhibit it, we study a cognitive
process greatly influenced by "cognitive emotions"20 and by
the social context of inquiry. In order to study reflection-in­
action, we must observe someone engaged in action. W e may
set a task for performance, as in the block-balancing experi­
ments, or may try to learn how someone is thinking and acting
as he carries out a task he has set for himself. In some cases,
we may interview a subject or ask him to think out loud as he
works on the task. In other cases, we may combine research
and intervention, seeking, for example, to help the subject
think his way through a situation of cognitive failure. Often,
merely by asking a question like, "How are you thinking about
it now?" we produce an intended or unintended intervention
which changes the subject's understanding and shifts the direc­
tion of action.
In all such cases, the subject's feelings about the task, about
his own performance, and about his relation to the researcher
are essential parts of the process under study. "Hawthorne ef­
fects" are unavoidable. The researcher cannot exempt himself
and ignores at his peril his own contribution to the social con­
text of the experiment. He is, in Geoffrey Vickers's phrase, an
agent-experient who must try to become aware of his own in­
fluences on the phenomena he is trying to understand. The

322

Im plications for th e Professions and T heir P lace in Society

authors of the block-balancing experiments comment, for ex­
ample, on their attempts to make on-the-spot tests of their own
theories-in-action. W hen the researcher adopts a strategy of
combined observation and intervention (and in the last analysis
he may be capable of no other strategy), he may find that he
can help his subject to reflect-in-action by allowing himself to
experience and reveal his own confusion.
In order to study reflection-in-action, the researcher must
learn an art of experiment in which reflection-in-action plays
a central part.
Researchers and practitioners. In the kinds of reflective re­
search I have outlined, researchers and practitioners enter into
modes of collaboration very different from the forms of ex­
change envisaged under the model of applied science. The
practitioner does not function here as a mere user of the re­
searcher’s product. He reveals to the reflective researcher the
ways of thinking that he brings to his practice, and draws on
reflective research as an aid to his own reflection-in-action.
Moreover, the reflective researcher cannot maintain distance
from, much less superiority to, the experience of practice.
W hether he is engaged in frame analysis, repertoire building,
action science, or the study of reflection-in-action, he must
somehow gain an inside view of the experience of practice. Re­
flective research requires a partnership of practitionerresearchers and researcher-practitioners.
This partnership may take a variety of forms. Groups of prac­
titioners may support one another in reflective research, as Parlett suggests in his study of teachers and counselors of the hear­
ing-impaired.21 The reflective researcher may take on the role
of consultant to the practitioner. Reflective research may be­
come a part of continuing education for practitioners, as in the
work of Barry Jentz and William Ronco.22 The researcher may
stand to the practitioner in a relationship of participant obser-

3*3

CONCLUSION

vation. T he practitioner may take time out to become a reflec­
tive researcher, moving in and out of research and practice ca­
reers.
T o the extent that such partnerships grow in importance
and begin to occupy an important place in the research enter­
prises of the professional schools, universities and practice insti­
tutions will enter into new relationships. University faculty will
become interested in professional practice, not only as a source
of problems for study or internships for students, but as a
source of access to reflective practice. As a consequence, a new
meaning will be given to activities usually considered periph­
eral to the conduct of the research university. Field work, con­
sultation, and continuing education, often considered as sec­
ond-class activities or as necessary evils, will rise to first-class
status as vehicles for research, the main business of the univer­
sity.
Conversely, practice institutions may come to see them­
selves increasingly as centers of research and education. As the
teaching hospital has long functioned, under a model of ap­
plied science, as a research and educational institution, so busi­
ness firms, law offices, social welfare agencies, engineering
groups, and architectural offices, may recognize the reflectionin-action of their members and make a place for the reflective
research which will support it.
The agenda of reflective research will be generated out of
dialogue between reflective researchers and practitionerresearchers, and will be constrained by the requirement that
the research be of the kind that practitioners can also under­
take.23 In consequence, there will be a new approach to the
sometimes vexing question of the implementation of research.
Implementation will be built into the process of reflective re­
search, for practitioners will gain and use insights derived from
it as they participate in it.

324

Im plications for th e Professions and T h eir P lace in S ociety

The roles of practitioner and researcher will have permeable
boundaries, and research and practice careers will intertwine
as a matter of course. W hile the relative weight given to reflec­
tive research or to practice might vary considerably in the
course of a career, one would normally expect practitioners to
function on occasion as reflective researchers, and vice versa.
W ithin the universities, the professional schools, in so far
as they become centers of reflective research, may become in­
creasingly independent of the disciplinary departments and in­
creasingly autonomous in their evolution of their own stan­
dards of rigor and relevance in research. One might then
expect a reduction of the status differential between the re­
search disciplines and the professional schools and with this,
a reduction in the dilemmas of the schools of the minor profes­
sions which Glazer has so well described.
Nevertheless, it is unlikely that the new roles and relation­
ships of practice and research will wholly displace the old. In
such fields as medicine, dentistry, agronomy, and engineering,
where relatively stable zones of practice lend themselves to the
model of applied science, it is more likely that the two systems
of relationship will coexist. But how? If the universities allow
them to compartmentalize, there will be a major loss of oppor­
tunity which could contribute to the university’s decline. If the
universities seek new integrations of research and practice, of
reflective research and applied science, then they will have to
make the epistemology of practice a focus not only for intellec­
tual attention but for institutional redesign.

325

CONCLUSION

Institutions for Reflective Practice
Increasingly, the lives of professionals in our society are bound
up with the lives of the formal bureaucratic organizations
through which most work is done. For engineers, physicians,
lawyers, architects, teachers, and social workers, bureaucracies
are the institutional settings of professional practice. And for
such institutions as industrial firms, public agencies, schools,
research institutes, law firms, and architectural offices, profes­
sional practitioners are necessary to the performance of organi­
zational work. As society becomes increasingly subject to pro­
fessional management, professionals tend increasingly to play
out their roles within bureaucracies that depend upon the exer­
cise of professional knowledge.
Max Weber, the prophet of bureaucracy, saw very clearly
that bureaucracy would require and foster the professionaliza­
tion of its members. He saw moreover that bureaucracy de­
manded and reinforced a particular model of professional
knowledge, that of technical expertise.
The management of the office follows general rules, which are
more or less stable, more or less exhaustive, and which can be
learned. Knowledge of these rules represents a special technical
learning which the officials possess. It involves jurisprudence, or
administrative or business management.24
Bureaucratization offers above all the optimum possibility for car­
rying through the principle of specializing administrative func­
tions according to purely objective considerations. Individual per­
formances are allocated to functionaries who have specialized
training and who by constant practice learn more and more.25

And in his vision of the coming dominance of the bureaucratic
form of organization, W eber also foresaw, at least dimly, the
326

Im p lication s for th e P rofessions and T h eir P lace in Society

widespread professionalization of occupations which would ac­
company the bureaucratization of social life.
From the earliest intellectual awareness of the bureaucratic
phenomenon, then, it has been clear that bureaucracy is bound
up with technical expertise. It is only a small step from this
to the observation that a shift in our view of professional knowl­
edge, away from technical expertise, portends a significant
change in the idea and reality of bureaucratic organization.
W e can get a sense of the meaning of this shift by consider­
ing the idea of organizational learning.
Formal organizations are task-systems, systems of roles and
rules, within which individuals serve as agents for the realiza­
tion of organizational values, missions, policies, and strategies
of action. Individual members contribute to the accumulation
of organizational reservoirs of knowledge about the environ­
ment, strategies of action, and experiences which sometimes
become exemplars for future action. Individuals’ contributions
enter into organizational memories, maps, and programs, on
which other individuals draw as they enact their roles. So, for
example, members of the consumer products firm described
in chapter 8 contribute to and draw on organizational learning
about product development.
In general, the more an organization depends for its survival
on innovation and adaptation to a changing environment, the
more essential its interest in organizational learning. On the
other hand, formal organizations also have a powerful interest
in the stability and predictability of organizational life. An or­
ganization is a cooperative system in which individuals depend
on the predictability of one another’s responses. Managers
must rely on the predictable behavior of their subordinates.
Surprise, which is essential to learning, is inimical to smooth
organizational functioning. Thus organizations evolve systems
of error detection and correction whose function is to maintain
3 *7

CONCLUSION

the constancy of variables critical to organizational life. They
are “ dynamically conservative.” 26
Significant organizational learning— learning which involves
significant change in underlying values and knowledge struc­
ture— is always the subject of an organizational predicament.
It is necessary to effective organizational adaptation, but it dis­
rupts the constancies on which manageable organizational life
depends.
In addition, as I have noted earlier, the individual agents of
organizational learning operate within a social system which
shapes their behavior. They have individual interests and theo­
ries of action which they bring to the creation of the behavioral
world in which they live, a behavioral world which may be
more or less conducive to the public testing of private assump­
tions, the surfacing of dilemmas, and the public discussions of
sensitive issues. They belong to subgroups which often enter
into win/lose games of attack and defense, deception, and col­
lusion. In so far as these social systems determine the bounda­
ries and directions of organizational inquiry, they are “ learning
systems” ; and in organizations like the consumer products firm
they may severely constrain organizational learning.
In the light of these observations, we can more usefully ex­
plore the meaning of reflective practice within a bureaucracy.
Reflection-in-action is both a consequence and cause of sur­
prise. W hen a member of a bureaucracy embarks on a course
of reflective practice, allowing himself to experience confusion
and uncertainty, subjecting his frames and theories to con­
scious criticism and change, he may increase his capacity to
contribute to significant organizational learning, but he also
becomes, by the same token, a danger to the stable system of
rules and procedures within which he is expected to deliver his
technical expertise.
Thus ordinary bureaucracies tend to resist a professional’s

328

Im plications for th e Professions and T heir P lace in Society

attempt to move from technical expertise to reflective practice.
And conversely, an organization suited to reflective practice
would have features very different from those of familiar bu­
reaucratic settings.
Let us consider the case of a public school. The teachers who
participated in the M IT Teachers’ Project were employed in
urban public schools. As they began to learn to value and en­
gage in reflective teaching practice, they continued to work in
these schools. Thus their experience can throw some light on
the question of reflective practice in a bureaucracy.
I shall describe a school typical of the ones in which they
taught. Such a school is built, in a very special sense, around
a theory of knowledge. There is a concept of privileged knowl­
edge which it is the business of teachers to teach, and students
to learn. This concept of knowledge is embodied in texts, cur­
riculum, lesson plans, examinations; indeed, it is institutional­
ized in every aspect of the school. Teachers are seen as techni­
cal experts who impart priviledged knowledge to students in
a system built, in Israel Scheffler’s phrase, on the metaphor of
“ nutrition.” 27 Children are fed portions of knowledge, in mea­
sured doses. They are expected to digest it and to give evi­
dence, in class response and examinations, that they have done
so. The curriculum is conceived as a menu of information and
skills, each lesson plan is a serving, and the entire process is
treated as a cumulative, progressive development.
W ithin the school, the order of space and the order of time
conform to this basic image. The school building is divided into
classrooms, each of which contains a teacher and a group of
twenty or thirty students clustered together according to grade
level. Each classroom is self-contained and the teacher is for
the most part isolated within it. Temporally, the school day
is divided into periods an hour or so in length, each of which
is supposed to be dedicated to covering the knowledge content

329

CONCLUSION

contained in a lesson plan. Days of the week, months, and
school year are similarly divided, according to the curricular
map of privileged knowledge.
The efficient transmission of knowledge requires a system
of controls. The teacher is supposed to convey standard units
of knowledge to large numbers of students and must employ
measures, in the form of quizzes and examinations, in order
to determine what the students have learned or failed to learn.
Through the use of marks, grade promotions, and more infor­
mal means, students are rewarded for their ability to demon­
strate that they have digested the appropriate knowledge and
skill, and they are punished for their failure to do so. Special
programs are available for those whose failure to pass appropri­
ate tests is attributed to learning disability.
Teachers are also subject to a similar system of controls.
They are monitored, and rewarded or punished, according to
the measures of their students' progress. And just as teachers
function as centers of instruction and control in relation to
students who are peripheral to them, so teachers occupy pe­
ripheral roles in relation to their supervisors. Curriculum and
lesson plans, as well as measures of performance and rewards
and punishments, emanate from a center and are imposed on
teachers at the periphery. The function of the supervisor is
that of assuring that teachers do carry out the functions ex­
pected of them, providing them with resources for doing so,
allocating rewards and punishments to them according to
their measured performance.
In the control of both students and teachers, a high priority
is placed on objectivity. It is considered important to achieve
quantitative measures of proficiency and progress which are in­
dependent of individual judgments. These are much preferred
to qualitative, narrative accounts of the experience of learning
or teaching. Quantitative measures permit the system of con­

33°

Im plications for th e Professions and T heir P lace in S ociety

trol, and the other systems that depend on it, to take on an
appearance of consistency, uniformity, precision, and detach­
ment.
The scope of the teacher's attention to her students is sup­
posed to be largely determined by the boundaries of the curric­
ulum. She is to be concerned with students from the point of
view of their relative success or failure in assimilating the mate­
rials of the lesson plan. Their lives outside of school— what
they do there and what knowledge or skill they display there—
fall outside the limits of her proper concern. Similarly, when
new technology enters the school, its function is to extend the
teacher's capacity to transmit the elements of the curriculum.
Computers, films, and audiovisual devices are designed to sup­
plement the teacher's work of communication and testing, drill
and practice.
These are some of the main features of an urban public
school. They are built around a special view of privileged
knowledge, its communication and its acquisition. But they
also conform to the outlines of a bureaucratic system. The
school presents itself as governed by a system of objectively de­
terminable formal rules and procedures which are administered
through a hierarchy. The school contains a knowledge struc­
ture which includes not only the content of the curriculum but
technologies of measurement, communication, control, and
maintenance, which are essential both to teaching and admin­
istration. Officials of the school are specialists, presumed to
have technical expertise. They place a high value on objectivity
and on procedural refinement.
O f course, the school as an institution of technical rational­
ity and bureaucratic efficiency has an underside, frequently
noted by its members, its constituents, and its critics. Students
may respond to the school by 'Turning off," diverting their real
energies and creativity to the world outside the school. Or they

33*

CONCLUSION

learn to beat the system by optimizing to the measures of per­
formance, discovering how to pass tests, get grades, and move
through the levels of the system, without thinking very much
about the knowledge they are supposed to be acquiring. Simi­
larly, teachers often learn to optimize to the measure of control
on their performance, striving to meet the letter of the stan­
dards imposed on them without worrying very much about
whether, or how, their students are learning; or they may think
about these things but reserve such thoughts for the world out­
side the school. Students learn to evade their supervisors’ con­
trol, giving nothing more than lip service to the formal system.
Such games of control and evasion are often embedded in polit­
ical networks, as individuals form alliances for the purpose of
gaining or protecting territory, security, and status.
W hat happens in such an educational bureaucracy when a
teacher begins to think and act not as technical expert but as
reflective practitioner? Her reflection-in-action poses a poten­
tial threat to the dynamically conservative system in which she
lives.
She tries to listen to her students. She asks herself, for exam­
ple, How is he thinking about this? W hat is the meaning of
his confusion? W hat is it that he already knows how to do?
But if she really listens to a student, she entertains ideas for
action that transcend the lesson plan. She may wish, for exam­
ple, to concentrate for a time on the nature of a student’s error
or confusion. W hy does he write, “ 36 + 36 = 312” ? As she
begins to understand how he thinks about the task, she may
invent new questions, new activities for the student to try, and
new ways of helping him learn addition. The lesson plan must
be put aside then, or else it must become a rough ground plan
for action, a skeleton around which the teacher develops varia­
tions according to her on-the-spot understanding of the prob­
lems of particular students. Curriculum becomes an inventory

332

Im plications for th e Professions and T heir P lace in S ociety

of themes of understanding and skill to be addressed rather
than a set of materials to be learned. Different students present
different phenomena for understanding and action. Each stu­
dent makes up a universe of one, whose potentials, problems,
and pace of work must be appreciated as the teacher reflects-inaction on the design of her work.
The freedom to reflect, invent, and differentiate would dis­
rupt the institutional order of space and time. If the teacher
must somehow manage the work of thirty students in a class­
room, how can she really listen to any one of them? If she is
held rigorously accountable to a sequence of hour-long periods
in which specified units of subject matter are to be covered,
then she cannot follow the logic of her reflection-in-action.
Classes must be small or readily divisible into smaller units, and
each teacher must be free to introduce variations in the institu­
tional schedule.
The teacher’s isolation in her classroom works against reflection-in-action. She needs to communicate her private puzzles
and insights, to test them against the views of her peers.
She must expand the scope of her interest in students. W hat
they know how to do in the world outside the school becomes
deeply interesting to her, for it suggests the intuitive compe­
tences on which she can build.
A reflective teacher needs a kind of educational technology
which does more than extend her capacity to administer drill
and practice. Most interesting to her is an educational technol­
ogy which helps students to become aware of their own intu­
itive understandings, to fall into cognitive confusions and ex­
plore new directions of understanding and action.28
Accountability, evaluation, and supervision would acquire
new meanings. There would be a shift from the search for cen­
trally administered, objective measures of student progress, to­
ward independent, qualitative judgments and narrative ac­

333

CONCLUSION

counts of experience and performance in learning and teach­
ing. Supervision would concern itself less with monitoring the
teacher’s coverage of curriculum content than with assessment
and support of the teacher’s reflection-in-action.
As teachers attempted to become reflective practitioners,
they would feel constrained by and would push against the rulegoverned system of the school, and in doing so they would be
pushing against the theory of knowledge which underlies the
school. Not only would they struggle against the rigid order of
lesson plans, schedules, isolated classrooms, and objective mea­
sures of performance; they would also question and criticize the
fundamental idea of the school as a place for the progressive
transmission of measured doses of privileged knowledge.
In fact, the participants in the Teachers’ Project had a vari­
ety of kinds of experiences as they attempted to live out in their
classrooms the new understandings and attitudes they were ac­
quiring. Their schools were in varying degrees approximations
to the stereotyped picture I have just drawn. A few teachers
had a great deal of discretionary freedom, and were able to
make their classrooms into enclaves of nontraditional teaching.
Some were frustrated by the traditional patterns and expecta­
tions built into the institutional routines of the school. A few
felt that the new approach to teaching was “ too good for that
school.”
W hat is clear is that, in a real-world school which tried to
encourage reflective teaching (as in the reflective contract be­
tween professional and client), conflicts and dilemmas would
surface which are absent, hidden, or of minor importance in
an ordinary school. In order to engage the learning capacities
and difficulties of particular students, a school would have to
manage student/teacher ratios much smaller than twenty-five
to one. In the face of resource constraints, how would appropri­
ate differentiations of curriculum and teaching attention be de­

334

Im plications for th e P rofessions and T heir P lace in S ociety

termined? Where teachers were encouraged to reflect-inaction, the meaning of “ good teaching” and “ a good class­
room” would become topics of urgent institutional concern.
Such questions could no longer be dismissed by reference to
objective measures of performance. Indeed, a major question
would hinge on the relationship between such measures and
the qualitative judgments of individual teachers. Principals
would have to ask, in framing their own roles, whether to “ let
a thousand flowers bloom” or to advocate their own standards
of excellence. If they chose the former, in the name of the
teacher’s freedom of action or in the spirit of participatory de­
mocracy, would the school fall into the kind of permissiveness
and intellectual sloppiness which characterized some of the al­
ternative schools of the 1960s?29 And if principals chose the
latter course, what would happen to the teacher’s freedom to
reflect-in-action? In a school supportive of reflective teaching,
a supervisor would advocate his own standards of educational
quality while at the same time inquiring into teachers’ under­
standings, confronting what he sees as poor teaching while at
the same time inviting teachers to confront his own behavior.
Yet in the Model I worlds of most schools, it is far more likely
that supervisors would oscillate between centralized control
and “ a thousand flowers.”
In a school supportive of reflective teaching, teachers would
challenge the prevailing knowledge structure. Their on-thespot experiments would affect not only the routines of teaching
practice but the central values and principles of the institution.
Conflicts and dilemmas would surface and move to center
stage. In the organizational learning system with which we are
most familiar, conflicts and dilemmas tend to be suppressed
or to result in polarization and political warfare. An institution
congenial to reflective practice would require a learning system
within which individuals could surface conflicts and dilemmas

335

CONCLUSION

and subject them to productive public inquiry, a learning sys­
tem conducive to the continual criticism and restructuring of
organizational principles and values.
I have dwelt on the case of a public school because of the
illuminating experience of the Teachers’ Project, but schools
are fundamentally similar to the other bureaucratic settings of
professional practice.
Wherever professionals operate within the context of an es­
tablished bureaucracy, they are embedded in an organizational
knowledge structure and a related network of institutional sys­
tems of control, authority, information, maintenance, and re­
ward, all of which are tied to prevailing images of technical
expertise. In industry, engineers and managers occupy special­
ized technical roles, function according to highly articulated
procedures, and tend to be precisely located within a hierarchi­
cal system of authority. Not only production and engineering,
but marketing, sales, personnel, finance, and general manage­
ment are increasingly defined as technical specialties. Indeed,
industry is often seen as the prototype of technical, bureau­
cratic rationality. Critics of the schools speak disparagingly, for
example, of the “ industrialization” of education.30
Large-scale social service agencies, hospitals, and architec­
tural offices have also come to function in the technical, bu­
reaucratic world. Here too professional work tends to be chan­
neled within a specialized task system and subjected to
objective measures of performance and control. Within these
systems, practitioners are increasingly constrained by technical
advances in the measurement and proceduralization of work.
In the name of cost reduction, for example, welfare workers
have now become objects of the sort of time and motion study
and efficiency expertise which originated in industry in the
early decades of the twentieth century. Computerized informa­
tion systems are used increasingly to monitor and control the

336

Im plications for th e Professions and T heir P lace in Society

performance of individual workers. A t the lower and middle
levels of the professional work force, computerized systems are
beginning to replace human beings.
The technological extension of bureaucracy, which rein­
forces the confinement of professional work to precisely de­
fined channels of technical expertise, exacerbates the inherent
conflict between bureaucracy and professional indentity.
W ithin highly specialized, technically administered systems of
bureaucratic control, how can professionals think of themselves
as autonomous practitioners? How can they strive to achieve
standards of professional excellence, cultivate artistry, and con­
cern themselves with the unique features of a particular case?
An industrial technologist chafes at general management’s sub­
ordination of product safety to short-term return on invest­
ment. A welfare worker feels deprofessionalized because con­
trol systems aimed at increasing his efficiency prevent him
from attending to the interests of individual clients. These pro­
fessionals bear a more than superficial resemblance to bluecollar workers deskilled by the numbing monotony of the as­
sembly line.
The tensions inherent in the bureaucratization of profes­
sional work tend to amplify when professionals seek to become
reflective practitioners. A practitioner who reflects-in-action
tends to question the definition of his task, the theories-inaction that he brings to it, and the measures of performance
by which he is controlled. And as he questions these things,
he also questions elements of the organizational knowledge
structure in which his functions are embedded. Thus a human
service worker who thinks critically about his practice may also
criticize an agency-wide pattern of selective inattention to the
most needy members of the client population. An engineer
who reflects-in-action may perceive a pattern of error which
he attributes to an excessive reliance on routinized systems of

337

CONCLUSION

quality control. Reflection-in-action tends to surface not only
the assumptions and techniques but the values and purposes
embedded in organizational knowledge.
To the extent that an institution seeks to accommodate to
the reflection-in-action of its professional members, it must
meet several extraordinary conditions. In contrast to the nor­
mal bureaucratic emphasis on uniform procedures, objective
measures of performance, and center/periphery systems of
control, a reflective institution must place a high priority on
flexible procedures, differentiated responses, qualitative appre­
ciation of complex processes, and decentralized responsibility
for judgment and action. In contrast to the normal bureau­
cratic emphasis on technical rationality, a reflective institution
must make a place for attention to conflicting values and pur­
poses. But these extraordinary conditions are also necessary for
significant organizational learning.
The predicament of the reflective practitioner in a bureau­
cracy is another face of the predicament of organizational
learning. Reflection-in-action is essential to the process by
which individuals function as agents of significant organiza­
tional learning, and it is at the same time a threat to organiza­
tional stability. An organization capable of examining and re­
structuring its central principles and values demands a learning
system capable of sustaining this tension and converting it to
productive public inquiry. An organization conducive to reflec­
tive practice makes the same revolutionary demand.

The Place of the Professions in the
Larger Society
According to the tradition of technical rationality, the profes­
sions mediate between science and society and translate scien­

338

Im p lication s for th e Professions and T heir P lace in Society

tific research into social progress. The model of professional
knowledge as technical expertise, based on the application of
science, underlies the traditional contract between the autono­
mous professional expert and his client, the traditional ex­
change relationship between practitioner and researcher, and
the rather paradoxical incorporation of ostensibly autonomous
professionals within the highly specialized structures of bureau­
cratic systems. In all of these ways, which I have described ear­
lier in this chapter, the tradition of technical rationality con­
tributes to the place of the professions in the larger society.
The tradition of Technical Rationality has an additional im­
pact, however, which we have not yet discussed. It has given
rise to our dominant model of the formation of public policy.
On this view, policy making is a process of social choice.
Rational policy choices derive from policy analyses which select
from among available courses of action those which maximize
social benefits and minimize social costs.51 Policy analysis is
conceived as a technical process which occurs within a political
context. The analyst employs sophisticated techniques in order
to measure and compare the impacts of alternative policies, but
he depends in several ways on the political process. The politi­
cal process supplies the definitions of policy objectives, social
benefits, and social costs. Sometimes policy analyses are con­
ceived as inputs to elected officials who make the final policy
choices. And more recently, proponents of the dominant
model of policy making have recognized that policies are con­
verted to programs of action through processes of implementa­
tion which may be guided or distorted by politics.52
According to this model, the key roles in public policy are
performed by professionals. Professionals supply technical ex­
pertise in substantive fields of policy such as health care and
housing. They meet the technical demands of policy analysis.
They design, implement, and evaluate government programs,

339

CONCLUSION

and as experts in the techniques of legislation and vote getting,
they manage the political process. The technical complexity
of rational social choice demands professional expertise.
T o the radical critics of the Technological Program, howev­
er, the professionalization of public policy is a technocratic dis­
tortion of democratic values. Professionals are a self-serving
elite who put science-based technique at the service of the busi­
ness class and under a facade of objectivity and value neutrality
feather their own and their masters’ nests. Just as professionals
use their special status to control and coerce their clients, so,
in technocratic government, they use technical expertise to
suppress the powerless and the dispossessed. Moreover, their
claim to extraordinary knowledge is an empty one. Beneath the
mystery of professional expertise lies ignorance and manipula­
tion.
The radical critique carries a utopian vision of social reform.
It is necessary to demystify the professions, exposing class inter­
est masquerading as Technical Rationality, so that society can
achieve democracy, equality, and social justice. It is necessary
to demonstrate the coerciveness of the professions, to show
how they have misappropriated knowledge, so as to pave the
way for a new breed of citizen-professionals committed to so­
cial justice. In the meantime, there is a need for counterprofes­
sional advocates and adversaries who can effectively resist pro­
fessionally engineered subversion of the public interest and the
rights of clients. The people must be educated to their rights
and disabused of their traditional respect for self-proclaimed
experts. Counterprofessionals, who can fight the experts on
their own ground, should defend the poor against urban re­
newal and gentrification, protect patients from the callous in­
trusions of the medical profession, and help the dispossessed
turn the legal system to their own advantage. In the same vein,
the supposedly objective findings of scientific research must be

340

Im plications for th e Professions and T heir P lace in S ociety

exposed as rationalizations for class interests. Counterresearch­
ers are needed to point out the establishment bias of neoclassi­
cal economics, the business and middle-class bias of the urban
planners, and the pretensions of industrial engineers who pro­
pose “ technological fixes” for the social problems of energy and
environmental quality.
In the field of public policy, demystification of the profes­
sions takes the form of debunking the myth of rational social
choice. Policy analysis is not rational choice but a rationaliza­
tion of political interests. The task of social reform is to em­
power the relatively powerless— blacks, women, ethnic minor­
ity groups, the aged, the disabled, prisoners— to organize for
an effective voice in the politics of policy making. Citizens
must be organized around such public issues as disarmament,
nuclear safety, and environmental quality. Not only the legal
system but propaganda, strikes, protests, and the full repertoire
of social action must be used to stop the power plays of the
establishment or to make sure that the dispossessed get “ a
piece of the action.” All of this requires expertise. So in the
course of the past twenty years counterprofessionals have
emerged to play critical roles in advocating the rights of the
dispossessed and organizing citizens’ groups around issues of
public interest. Like the professionals who serve government
and industry, counterprofessionals contribute substantive ex­
pertise, provide alternative rationales for public action, and put
their techniques of negotiation and infighting at the service
of those who strive for a voice in the political process.
W ith the help of the counterprofessionals, militant minori­
ties and citizens’ groups have succeeded in transforming public
policy. “ Special interest politics” has become the order of the
day. In field after field, special interest groups have succeeded
in bringing about laws and regulations aimed at curbing the
excesses of established institutions. More recently, as these suc-

34*

CONCLUSION

cesses have triggered reactions from the Right, public policy
has become a field of visible political contention in which all
sides— established institutions, adversaries of the establish­
ment, and counteragents of the Right— have armed them­
selves with professional expertise.
It does not follow, of course, that professionalization of polit­
ical disputes leads to public consensus. Often, on the contrary,
the addition of professional expertise serves to extend political
conflict. But there is a well-known theory of democracy which
explains and justifies this process, a theory which appeals to
radical critics as well as to their traditional opponents. On this
view, democracy consists in a play of countervailing powers
which tends, when it is effective, to prevent any one group
from establishing permanent domination over the others.33
Conflicts among groups are kept within manageable bounds
by institutional mechanisms for the resolution of political dis­
putes, that is, by the courts, the voting booth, and the bargain­
ing table. Increasingly these institutions have become arenas
for the activities of professional advocates and adversaries.
But the social reforms of the radical critics are also vulnera­
ble to criticism.
There is something inconsistent about a demystification of
professional expertise which leads to the establishment of a
breed of counterprofessional experts. Apparently even in a
world liberated from the dominance of established interests
there is a need for special knowledge; and in a world of estab­
lished interests armed with professional expertise there is a
need for counterexpertise. But experts tend to behave like ex­
perts. Citizen-professionals and professional advocates may
also show themselves to be disposed to unilateral control of
their clients and interested in the preservation of their own spe­
cial status. In socialist countries, citizen-professionals have be­
come a “ new class,” an elite group operating from bureaucra-

342

Implications for the Professions and Their Place in Society
cies that display both the insensitivity and the sluggishness we
have learned to associate with the bureaucratic phenomenon.34
Counterprofessionals may succeed in containing the free
movement of established interests, but their success is often
accompanied by unwanted side effects. W hen environmental­
ists succeed in blocking land development, for example, they
may also contribute to the shortage of low- and middle-class
housing.35 T he regulatory mechanisms brought into being by
the protest movements of the 1960s and early 1970s have fre­
quently turned out to be ineffective in solving the social prob­
lems for which they were designed.36 And the traditional insti­
tutions for dispute settlement are often incapable of converting
political contention to acceptable social action.
T he courts, which have taken on an enormously expanded
role in such fields as urban education, environmental regula­
tion, and public housing, have shown a very limited capacity
to arbitrate among the claims of contending professionals.
Caught in the crossfire of conflicting technical positions,
judges have often resorted to the technicalities of the law with­
out deeply understanding the substantive problems of policy
at stake in their decisions. And when judges have taken respon­
sibility for the management of urban schools or public housing,
they have had recourse to professionals who reintroduce, under
the auspices of the courts, whatever biases accompany their
expertise. T he electoral process often fails to produce stable
solutions to public problems. W hen conflicting professional
judgments about policy are put to a vote, the results often re­
flect nothing more substantial than the winds of political
change. And when elected officials deliberate over policy con­
flicts, their legislative compromises are often so vague as to
allow those conflicts to reemerge when administrators try to
convert policies to programs.
As the limits of judicial and electoral mechanisms have be­

343

CONCLUSION

come manifest, the bargaining table has gained prominence.
Professional mediation, which originated in the field of labormanagement negotiation, has begun to spread to the fields of
land use, hazardous-waste disposal, and environmental quali­
ty. These extensions of the mediating role are still in their in­
fancy, and it remains to be seen how they will evolve. Al­
ready, however, a danger has become apparent. Given the
nature of their task, mediators tend in practice to define suc­
cess in terms of keeping the peace. W hen new information
threatens emerging agreement, it tends to be dismissed as
“ dangerous knowledge.” 37 Thus mediators may pursue agree­
ment at the expense of understanding.
W hen the professional representatives of contending social
factions cannot agree about issues of policy, society has re­
course to the courts, the electoral process, and the bargaining
table. But when the disputed issues are technically and evaluatively complex, it is small wonder that institutions for dispute
settlement yield results perceived as arbitrary or merely expedi­
ent, or that they reintroduce a disturbing element of profes­
sional judgment. W hen they dispense with expertise, they suf­
fer from its absence; and when they rely on it, they reintroduce
its dangers.
There is a similar contradiction in the social reforms of the
radical critics. They seek to demystify professional expertise in
order to eliminate or contain the professionals who serve the
interests of the dominant class. But they cannot dispense with
professionals, either to conduct the technically complex busi­
ness of society or to counter the excesses of the established pro­
fessions. So they reintroduce the evils of expertise.
So long as the conduct of society depends upon special
knowledge and competence, there will be an essential place for
the professions. And so long as the professions are shaped by
traditional models of knowledge and practice, neither the ide­

344

Implications for the Professions and Their Place in Society
ology nor the institutional reforms of the radical critics will
eliminate the evils of expertise.
The idea of reflective practice is an alternative to the tradi­
tional epistemology of practice. It leads, as we have seen, to
new conceptions of the professional-client contract, the part­
nership of research and practice, and the learning systems of
professional institutions. Now I would like to suggest how it
might also lead us to think differently about the roles of profes­
sionals in public policy and about the place of the professions
in the larger society.
The idea of reflective practice leads, in a sense both similar
to and different from the radical criticism, to a demystification
of professional expertise. It leads us to recognize that for both
the professional and the counterprofessional, special knowl­
edge is embedded in evaluative frames which bear the stamp
of human values and interests. It also leads us to recognize that
the scope of technical expertise is limited by situations of un­
certainty, instability, uniqueness, and conflict. W hen researchbased theories and techniques are inapplicable, the professional
cannot legitimately claim to be expert, but only to be especially
well prepared to reflect-in-action.
From this perspective, it is not difficult to see how the tradi­
tional epistemology of practice holds a potential for coercion.
W e need not make the (possibly valid) attribution that profes­
sionals are motivated by the wish to serve class interests or pro­
tect their special status. Whenever a professional claims to
“ know,” in the sense of the technical expert, he imposes his
categories, theories, and techniques on the situation before
him. He ignores, explains away, or controls those features of
the situation, including the human beings within it, which do
not fit his knowledge-in-practice. W hen he works in an institu­
tion whose knowledge structure reinforces his image of exper­
tise, then he tends to see himself as accountable for nothing

345

CONCLUSION

more than the delivery of his stock of techniques according to
the measures of performance imposed on him. He does not
see himself as free, or obliged, to participate in setting objec­
tives and framing problems. The institutional system reinforces
his image of expertise in inducing a pattern of unilateral con­
trol.
If we accept these criticisms of Technical Rationality, we
will no longer uncritically accept the professional’s claim to
mandate, autonomy, and license. If there are important limits
to the scope of technical expertise, we will want to make sure
that professionals do not overstep those limits in their claims
to authority based on merely technical competence. If techni­
cal expertise is value-laden, and technical experts have interests
of their own which shape their understandings and judgments,
then we will recognize the need for social constraints on profes­
sional freedom. On the other hand, we will also respect the
professional’s claim to extraordinary knowledge in the areas
susceptible to technical expertise, and we will place a special
value on practitioners who reflect-in-action both on their own
evaluative frames and in situations which transcend the limits
of their expertise.
These considerations complicate the task of describing the
appropriate place of the professions in the larger society. Under
the perspective of reflective practice, professionals are neither
the heroic avant-garde of the Technological Program nor a vil­
lainous elite who prevent the people from taking control of
their lives. Professionals are more appropriately seen, I think,
as participants in a larger societal conversation; when they play
their parts well, they help that conversation to become a reflec­
tive one.
In the processes by which ideas of social problems and solu­
tions come into good currency, descriptions of reality are so­
cially constructed. Through our public institutions, through

346

Implications for the Professions and Their Place in Society
the media, through the actions of intellectuals, and through
the processes of public debate, we construct ideas powerful for
action concerning the issues and crises of our society, the prob­
lems to be solved, the policies to be adopted. W hen we act
from these ideas, we change social reality. Sometimes we make
our ideas real, but also thereby create new problems and dilem­
mas. T he “ we” who act in this way are agents of the society.
W e are agents-experient, in Geoffrey Vickers’s sense, who are
at once the subjects and the objects of action. W e are in the
problematic situation that we seek to describe and change, and
when we act on it, we act on ourselves. W e engage in a contin­
uing conversation with the larger societal situation of which
we are a part, rather as a designer (Quist, for example) con­
verses with his design situation. Like him, we construct a view
of the situation; we act from it, thereby changing the situation;
but we also elicit “ back-talk” which takes the form of unantici­
pated meanings, problems, and dilemmas.
In the web of such societal conversations, policy forma­
tion— the description of social problems, the passage of legisla­
tion, the design and implementation of government pro­
grams— constitutes a single strand. The process of social
problem setting, for example, is far more comprehensive and
complex than the process by which public policy problems are
set.38 But public policy represents an aspect, sometimes the
formalization, of the more comprehensive process. And public
policy, when it has been designed and converted to public ac­
tion, enters into the larger societal process, changing it once
again. Thus for example over the past thirty years ideas about
“ urban crime” have come into good currency. T he setting of
the social problem of urban crime has been a complex process
of describing an aspect of urban reality, a process in which the
police, judges, correctional officials, citizens’ groups, social re­
searchers, novelists, filmmakers, and mass media have played

347

CONCLUSION

their various parts. The many different voices involved in this
process have brought multiple, often conflicting, frames to the
description of the phenomenon. Urban crime has been seen,
for example, as a consequence of the form of the city, which
leaves concentrations of poor minority groups in a center sur­
rounded by affluent (and vulnerable) suburbs. It has been seen
as failure of the police and the courts to provide swift and sure
punishment. It has been seen as a by-product of the culture
of poverty. And it has been seen as a manifestation of a streak
of ineradicable evil in human nature. Through processes about
which we understand relatively little, I believe, particular de­
scriptions of the phenomenon of urban crime have at various
times become powerful for action. In the late 1960s, for exam­
ple, urban crime came to be seen as an expression of a “ racist
society.” The Kerner Commission gave this view of the status
of formal public policy, and the urban programs of Lyndon
Johnson’s Great Society were, in some measure, a response to
it. Later, in partial reaction to the effects of those programs
and partially in response to other currents in the society, a “ law
and order” view of urban crime became powerful and new poli­
cies of criminal justice, emphasizing the swift and sure appre­
hension and punishment of criminals, came into effect. In the
past twenty years or so, both of these views of the phenomenon
have been alive in the society and have at various times pre­
dominated.
The struggle to define the situation, and thereby to deter­
mine the direction of public policy, is always both intellectual
and political. Views of reality are both cognitive constructs,
which make the situation understandable in a certain way, and
instruments of political power. In the larger societal conversa­
tion with the situation, problem setting, policy definition, and
interpretation of the situation’s “ back-talk” are always marked
by intellectual inquiry and by political contention.

348

Implications for the Professions and Their Place in Society
In these processes the leading roles are often played by pro­
fessionals. It is the social critics, the policy analysts, the advo­
cates, the researchers, the elected officials, and the administra­
tors who function as agents of inquiry. But their contributions
to the description of social reality are always embedded in a
process of political contention. Professionals represent the
views and values of established interests, and other profession­
als advocate the interests of the dissident and the dispossessed.
It is one group of correctional officials, judges, police chiefs,
social researchers, and policy analysts who have championed
the “ law and order” perspective on urban crime, and another
such group which has championed a view of the criminal jus­
tice system as a social evil which criminalizes and makes vic­
tims of the poor and dispossessed. As professionals play their
roles in the process of public policy— and in the more compre­
hensive societal conversation in which that process is embed­
ded— they are voices of institutionalized contention, actors in
an essentially adversarial process.
The uses of institutionalized contention are undeniable. T he
radical critics of the professions are right in their claim that
professional expertise can be used, wittingly or unwittingly, to
mask the biases of established interests. There is no reason to
suppose that professionals can be trusted to perceive the coer­
civeness of the institutions they represent; and even when they
perceive it, there is no reason to suppose that professionals
alone can act effectively to change the directions of institu­
tional behavior. There is undeniable social utility in counterin­
stitutions which criticize and resist the excesses of established
institutions, and advocate the rights and interests of the rela­
tively powerless. But increasingly, as we have seen, the profes­
sionally instrumented play of countervailing powers has led to
the polarization of society, to pendulum swings from one ex­
treme position to its opposite, to stalemate, and to frustration

349

CONCLUSION

at our inability to manage a vital, cumulative process of societal
inquiry.
Apparently the social issues at the center of the play of coun­
tervailing powers are not problems to be solved but complex
predicaments.39 W hen such predicaments, or dilemmas, be­
come the focus of political contention, and when professionals
are enlisted in the service of the contending parties, we get
polarization, pendulum swings, and stalemate. W e do not get
new views of social reality which take account of the percep­
tions of those locked in combat. W e do not get public inquiry
into the dilemmas which underlie our swings from one policy
extreme to another. And we do not get reflective listening to
the situation’s “ back-talk,” the kind of listening which leads
policy makers to criticize and restructure their views of policy
problems.
In order to achieve such outcomes as these, professionals en­
gaged in the political contention of the policy-making process
would have to be capable of inquiry within an adversarial set­
ting. They would have to be capable of advocating and acting
on their own views of reality while at the same time subjecting
them to reflection, of taking an adversarial stance toward their
opponent’s views while at the same time striving to understand
them. Professionals in conflict with one another would also
have to be capable of reciprocal reflection-in-action.
W hen societal predicaments are grasped only through insti­
tutionalized contention, where each contending party sees a
piece of the reality and embodies his perception in a view
which he treats as a battle-cry, then it is unlikely that a fuller
and deeper understanding of the predicament will become
powerful for public policy. In order for society’s conversation
with its situation to become reflective, individuals involved in
adversarial processes must undertake reflective inquiry. The
question is, are they likely to do so? Is the idea of reciprocal

35°

Implications for the Professions and Their Place in Society
reflection in an adversarial setting any less utopian than the
Technological Program or the radical ideal of liberation?
I have had two recent experiences that seem to me to bear
on this question.
Recently I attended a conference of activists from the con­
sumer movement. The conference was especially interesting
because several generations of the movement were in atten­
dance. The older ones had devoted their lives to the enterprise
of constraining the freedom of industrial firms to merchandise
products that are unsafe or inferior. The youngest had been
inspired by the muckraking and organizing methods of Ralph
Nader. The middle-aged had labored in the vineyards of the
established consumer organizations. All groups were agreed,
however, that the consumer movement had reached a turning
point. Victories had been achieved but the victories had begun
to seem Pyrrhic. Through advertising and public relations, in­
dustrial firms had begun to turn consumerism to their own ben­
efit. Hard-won regulatory reforms had proved difficult or im­
possible to implement. T he future directions of the consumer
movement seemed far from clear. Toward the end of the con­
ference, I suggested with some trepidation that the future of
the movement might lie in the development of a new strategy
which combined adversarial process with cooperative inquiry.
T he responses to this idea fell along generational lines. T he
oldest participants found the suggestion unthinkable: how
could they cooperate with their traditional enemy? T he mid­
dle-aged participants were intrigued but skeptical. T he young­
est asserted that the idea was a familiar one, which some of
them were already pursuing. They were helping consumer
products manufacturers to develop programs of product safety,
reliability, and quality assurance in order to comply with the
regulations which the consumer movement had helped to put
in place.

351

CONCLUSION

Not long after this experience, 1had a visit from an indus­
trial manager who was director of product safety for a large
chemical company. He wanted my help in thinking through
a problem of organizational learning. In one division of his
company, people had learned a way of working with federal
regulators that they had found extraordinarily effective. As
they developed new chemical products and gathered data on
their environmental effects, they made full and immediate dis­
closures to the federal regulators. They had discovered that
when regulators had early access to data and were able to par­
ticipate in its interpretation, they were inclined to work cooper­
atively with the industry’s representatives. Sometimes, it was
true, early disclosure led to a negative regulatory judgment; but
over the long run this approach had significantly reduced the
delays and difficulties usually experienced in the process of
gaining federal approval. Surprisingly, the policy of full and im­
mediate disclosure seemed to have produced a climate in which
regulators and industry scientists were disposed to explore and
understand one another’s point of view. But in other divisions
of the firm, the approach to regulation was very different. Here
regulators were considered as adversaries who should be fed tai­
lored information packaged in carefully prepared cases submit­
ted for approval. M y visitor wanted help in thinking how to
get the other divisions to learn what one division already knew.
These two examples do not, of course, establish the presence
of a widespread interest in, much less a capacity for, coopera­
tive inquiry within an adversarial context. At best, they consti­
tute an “ existence proof.” Some professionals are interested
in this process and have manifested some capacity for it. 1 can­
not say how widespread the interest is, or how broadly distrib­
uted the capacity may be. Professionals in the field of environ­
mental and energy policy have begun to talk and write in this
vein. In Europe, proponents of a “ new social contract” have

352

Implications for the Professions and Their Place in Society
argued that dilemmas of national economic policy are rooted
in issues of political economy which can be effectively managed
only when the traditional adversaries— government, labor, and
business— work out processes of cooperative inquiry into eco­
nomic policy. In some communities threatened with economic
dislocation, representatives of the industrial democracy move­
ment have instituted “ search conferences” in which tradition­
ally adversarial sectors— business, labor, and local govern­
ment— have participated in long-term cooperative inquiry
aimed at community development. Eric Trist’s work in James­
town, New York, is a notable case in point.40
There seems, then, to be some growing recognition of the
need for cooperative inquiry within adversarial contexts. The
idea of reflective practice leads to a vision of professionals as
agents of society’s reflective conversation with its situation,
agents who engage in cooperative inquiry within a framework
of institutionalized contention. T he question remains, howev­
er, whether it is utopian, in the pejorative sense, to suppose
that professionals who occupy key roles in the public policy pro­
cess can learn on a broad basis to engage in reciprocal reflection-in-action.
In earlier chapters, I have offered evidence that some profes­
sional practitioners do have a capacity for reflection-in-action
on their own frames and theories of action. I have also noted
limits to reflection-in-action which result from the behavioral
worlds and organizational learning systems that individuals are
skilled at creating. I have argued that in order to broaden and
deepen their capacity for reflection-in-action, professional
practitioners must discover and restructure the interpersonal
theories of action which they bring to their professional lives.
W hat kind of a question are we posing when we ask whether
such a vision is merely utopian? The existence of a widespread
capacity for reciprocal reflection-in-action is unlikely to be dis­

353

CONCLUSION

covered by an ordinary social science which tends to detect,
and treat as reality, the patterns of institutionalized contention
and limited learning which individuals transcend, if at all, only
on rare occasions. The extent of our capacity for reciprocal reflection-in-action can be discovered only through an action sci­
ence which seeks to make what some of us do on rare occasions
into a dominant pattern of practice.

354

Notes

Chapter 1
1 . Everett Hughes, “T h e Study of Occupations/’ in Robert K. Merton, Leonard
Broom and Leonard S. Cottrell, Jr., eds., Sociology Today (New York: Basic Books,

1959)2. H.L. Wilensky, “T h e Professionalization of Everyone?” , American Journal o f
Sociology 70 (September 1964): 137-158.
3. For example, Scott Throw, O n e L: A n Inside A ccount o f L ife in the First Year
at Harvard Law School (New York: G.P. Putnam’s Sons, 1977).
4. Ivan lllich, A Celebration o f Awareness: A C a ll for Institutional Revolution
(Garden C ity, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1970).
5. See, for example, The N ew Professionals , Gross and Osterman, eds. (New York:
Simon and Schuster, 1972).
6. Kenneth Lynn, Introduction to “T h e Professions,” Fall 1963 issue of Daedalus,
Journal of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, p. 649.
7. Richard Hofstadter, Anti-Intellectualism in American L ifey quoted in Jethro
Lieberman, The Tyranny o f Expertise (New York: Walker and Company, 1970), p.
1.
8. John F. Kennedy, quoted in Lieberman, Tyranny o f Expertise p. 5.
9. R.E. Lane, “T he Decline of Politics and Ideology in a Knowledgeable Society,”

American Sociological Review, 31, (October 1966).
10. Amitai Etzioni, The Active Society (New York: Th e Free Press, 1968). Daniel
Bell, “ Notes on the Post-Industrial Society,” The Public Interest, 6 and 7, (Winter
and Spring 1967).
11. Lane, “ Decline of Politics,” p. 653.
12. Daniel Bell, “ Labor in the Post-Industrial Society,” Dissent, 19, 1 (Winter
1972): 70-80.
13. Ibid.

355

NOTES
14. W ilbert Moore, The Professions (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1970),
pp. 15 -16 .
15. Lieberman, Tyranny o f Expertise, p. 54.
16. Paul Freund, “T h e Legal Professions," Daedalus (Fall 1963): 696.
17. Ibid., p. 697.
18. Lynn, Daedalus (Fall 1963): 651.
19. Bernard Barber, “ Some Problems in the Sociology of the Professions," Daedalus
(Fall 1963): 686.
20. James Gustafson, “Th e Clergy in the United States," Daedalus (Fall, 1963):

74321. William Alonso, “Cities and C ity Planners," in Daedalus (Fall 1963): 838.
22. See my Beyond the Stable State (New York: Random House, 1971), for a discus­
sion of these.
23. For example, Peter Marris and Martin Rein, Dilemmas o f Social Reform (New
York: Atherton Press, 1967).
24. See Osterman and Gross, New Professionals ; Lieberman, Tyranny o f Expertise;
and Professionalism and Social Change , Paul Halmos, ed., The Sociological Review

Monograph 20 University of Keele, (December 1973).
25. Arlene K. Daniels, “ How Free Should Professions Be?" in Eliot Freidson, ed.,

The Professions and Their Prospects (Beverly Hills: Sage Publications, 1971), p. 56.
26. Alan Gartner, The Preparation o f Human Service Professionals (New York:
Human Sciences Press, 1976), p. 121.
27. Robert Perucci, “ In the Service of Man: Radical Movements in the Profes­
sions," in Halmos, Professionalism and Social Change , pp. 179-194.
28. See, for example, David Halberstam, The Best and the Brightest (New York:
Random House, 1972) and Charles R. Morris, The C o st o f G ood Intentions (New
York: W .W . Norton, 1980).
29. Charles Reich, The Law o f the Planned Society, quoted in Lieberman, Tyranny

o f Expertise, p. 268.
30. David Rutstein, The Com ing Revolution in M edicine (Cambridge, Mass.: M I T
Press, 1967).
31. For example, Marie Haug, “ Deprofessionalization: An Alternate Hypothesis for
the Future," and Martin Oppenheimer, “T h e Proletarianization of the Professions",
in Halmos, Professionalism and Social Change.
32. Halmos, in his introduction to the volume he has edited (Halmos, 1973), ob­
serves that the “ contemporary climate of opinion is radically and bitterly antiprofes­
sional." (p. 6) Antiprofessional critics wish to “deprofessionalize the professions
. . . by creating a para-professional or subprofessional constituency and endowing it
with power increasingly to match the power of the fully licensed professionals." (p.
7) But he goes on to say that “ the very radical denunciatory campaigns are coupled
with political demands for more generously provided, and more equitably distributed,
competent, and therefore presumably professional personal services." (p. 7)
33. Dr. Ephraim Friedman, Dean of the Albert Einstein School of Medicine, pri­
vate communication to the author.
34. Dr. William Pownes, former Dean of the Sloan School of Management, private
communication to the author.
35. Dr. Harvey Brooks, former Dean of the Harvard University School of Applied
Physics, private communication to the author.
36. Harvey Brooks, “T he Dilemmas of Engineering Education," I E E E Spectrum
(February 1967): 89.
37. Ibid., p. 90.

35^

Notes
38. T he language here is borrowed from John Dewey. In his Logic: the Theory of
Inquiry, Dewey proposed that problems are constructed from situations of indetermi­
nacy, problematic situations, that we apprehend through the experience of worry, trou­
ble, or doubt.
39. Russell Ackoff, “T h e Future of Operational Research is Past,” Journal o f Opera­
tional Research Society, 30, 2 (Pergamon Press, Ltd., 1979): 93-104.
40. Ibid., pp. 90-100.
41. Ibid., p. 94.
42. Ibid., p. 100.
43. Erik Erikson, “T h e Nature of Clinical Evidence," in Daniel Learner, ed., E vi­

dence and Inference (Glencoe, 111.: T he Free Press of Glencoe, 1958), p. 72.
44. Dr. Ephraim Friedman, private communication to the author.
45. T h e case of the John Hancock Building, in Boston, Massachusetts, is an interest­
ing example. W hen the glass windows in this towering and beautiful skyscraper began
to shatter, it was impossible for skilled engineers to arrive at a confident analysis of
the problem. In the building itself, the phenomena were too complex to analyze; and
experiments that might clarify matters were either prohibitively expensive or danger­
ous. In the wind tunnel, models were developed and experiments were performed,
but there was little confidence that the wind tunnel was a good representation of the
actual conditions in the building. In the end, all windows were fitted with new, heavier,
tougher, and more expensive panes of glass. Every once in a while, one still shatters.
46. Harvey Brooks, private communication to the author.
47. Leston Havens, Approaches to the M in d (Boston: Little, Brown, Inc., 1973).
48. Nathan Glazer, “T h e Schools of the Minor Professions," Minerva, (1974).

Chapter 2
1. A .M . Carr-Saunders, Professions: Their Organization and Place in Society (O x­
ford: T h e Clarendon Press, 1928). Quoted in Vollmer and Mills, eds., Professionaliza­

tion (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1966), p. 3.
2. Wilbert Moore, The Professions (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1970),

P 56.
3. Ibid.
4. Ibid., p. 141.
5. Jethro Lieberman, Tyranny of Expertise (New York: Walker and Company),
P- 55
6. Nathan Glazer, “ Schools of the Minor Professions," Minerva, (1974): 346.
7. Ibid., p. 363.
8. Ibid., p. 348.
9. Ibid., p. 349.
10. Moore, The Professions, p. 56.
11. Edgar Schein, Professional Education (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1973), p. 43.
12. Ibid., p. 39.
13. William Goode, “T h e Librarian: From Occupation to Profession," reprinted
in Vollmer and Mills, Professionalization, p. 39.
14. Ibid.
15. Ibid.

357

NOTES
16. Ernest Greenwood, “Attributes of a Profession/’ reprinted in Vollmer and
Mills, Professionalization, p. 11.
17. Ibid., p. 19.
18. Ibid., p. 12.
19. Harvey, Brooks, “ Dilemmas of Engineering Education,” I E E E Spectrum (Feb­
ruary 1967): 89.
20. Schein, Professional Education, p. 44.
21. Barry Thom e, “ Professional Education in Medicine,” in Education for the Pro­

fessions o f M edicine, Law, Theology and Social Welfare (New York: McGraw-Hill,
»9 7 ?). P 3°22. Ibid., p. 31.
23. Ibid.
24. Alan Gartner, Preparation o f Human Service Professionals (New York: Human
Sciences Press, 1976), p. 80.
25. Ibid., p. 93.
26. Derek Bok, “Th e President’s Report,” reprinted in The Harvard Magazine,
(May-June 1979): 83.
27. Ibid., p. 84.
28. Ibid.
29. From private conversations with three Harvard Business School faculty mem­
bers.
30. See, for example, Richard J. Bernstein, The Restructuring o f Social and Political

Theory (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1976).
3 1 . I first used this term in Technology and Change (New York: Delacorte Press,
1966).
32. Auguste Com te, quoted in Jurgan Habermas, Knowledge and Human Interests
(Boston: Beacon Press, 1968), p. 77.
33. O f course, the problem of the lack of agreement about ends has engaged the
attention of many of the protagonists of the positivist epistemology of practice. A p­
proaches to this problem have ranged from the search for an ultimate end, to which
all others could be subordinated; to a “ universal solvent” for ends, as in the utility
functions of the welfare economists; to the “ piecemeal social engineering” proposed
by Karl Popper. For a discussion of these, their defects and merits, see Charles Frankel,
“Th e Relation of Theory to Practice: Some Standard Views,” in Social Theory and
Social Intervention, Frankel et al., eds. (Cleveland: Case Western Reserve University
Press, 1968).
34. Edward Shils, “T he Order of Learning in the United States from 1865 to 1920:
the Ascendancy of the Universities,” Minerva, X V I, 2 (Summer 1978): 171.
35. Ibid., p. 173.
36. Thorsten Veblen, The Higher Learning in America, reprint of 1918 edition,
(New York, Hill and W ang, 1962).
37. Ibid., p. 15.
38. Ibid., p. 23.
39. Bernard Barber, in “Some Problems in the Sociology of the Professions,” Daeda­
lus (Fall, 1963): 674.
40. Everett Hughes, “ Higher Education and the Professions,” in Content and C o n ­
te x t Essays on College Education, Carl Kaysen, ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1973),
p. 660.
41. The term is taken from Clifford Gecrtz, “Thick Description: Toward an Inter­
pretive Theory of Culture,” in Clifford Geertz, The Interpretation o f Cultures (New
York: Basic Books, 1973).

358

Notes
42. Schein, Professional Education, p. 44.
43. Ibid., p. 45.
44. Herbert Simon, The Sciences o f the Artificial (Cambridge, Mass.: M I T Press,
1972), P 55
45. Ibid., p. 56.
46. Ibid.
47. Ibid., p. 57.
48. Ibid., p. 61.
49. Bernstein, Restructuring, p. 207.
50. Gilbert Ryle, “ O n Knowing How and Knowing That,“ in The Concept o f M in d
(London: Hutcheson, 1949), p. 32.
51. Andrew Harrison, M aking and Thinking (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1978).
52. Chester Barnard, in The Functions o f the Executive (Cambridge, Mass.: Har­
vard University Press, 1968, first published 1938), p. 302.
53. Ibid., p. 305.
34. Ibid., p. 302.
55. Ibid., p. 306.
56. Michael Polanyi, The Tacit Dimension, (New York: Doubleday and C o., 1967),
P 4
57. Ibid., p. 12.
58. Chris Alexander, Notes Toward a Synthesis o f Form, (Cambridge, Mass.: Har­
vard University Press, 1968).
$9. Ibid., p. 53.
60. Ibid., p. 5$.
61. Geoffrey Vickers, unpublished memorandum, M IT , 1978.
62. T h e whole of contemporary linguistics and psycholinguistics is relevant here—
for example, the work of Chomsky, Halle, and Sinclair.
63. Alfred Schütz, C ollected Papers (The Hague: Nijhoff, 1962).
64. Ray L. Birdwhistell, Kinesics and Context (Philadelphia: University of Pennsyl­
vania Press, 1970).
65. Jonathan Evan Maslow, “Grooving on a Baseball Afternoon,“ in M ainliner
(M ay 1981): 34.
66. Barbel Inhelder and Annette Karmiloff-Smith, “ If you want to get ahead, get
a theory,“ Cognition 3,3: 195-212.
67. Ibid., p. 195.
68. Ibid., p. 202.
69. Ibid., p. 203.
70. Ibid.
71. Ibid., p. 205.
72. Ibid.
73. Ibid.
74. Ibid., p. 203.
75. Ibid., p. 199.
76. Leo Tolstoy, “ O n Teaching the Rudiments,“ in Tolstoy on Education, Leo
Wiener, ed. (Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press, 1967).
77. T he staff of the Teachers’ Project consisted of Jeanne Bamberger, Eleanor
Duckworth, and Margaret Lampert. M y description of the incident of “ giving the
child reason” is adapted from a project memorandum by Lampert.

359

NOTES

C h ap te r 3
1. Th e origins of this case study are in a review of architectural education in which

1 participated during the late 1970s. The study, supported by the Andrew Mellon
Foundation, was directed by Dean William Porter of the M I T School of Architecture
and Planning and Dean Maurice Kilbridge of the Harvard Graduate School of Design.
Several participant/observation studies were conducted in design studios at universi­
ties at several locations in the United States. It is from one of these that I have drawn
the protocol which follows. It was recorded by Roger Simmonds, then a graduate stu­
dent of mine. I am grateful to Simmonds for his help in this, as well as to William
Porter, Julian Beinart, Imre Halasz, and Florian Buttlar, with all of whom I had illumi­
nating conversations. Dean Porter, especially, helped to initiate me into the world of
architectural thinking.
2. Quist and Petra are fictitious names which Simmonds assigned to the partici­
pants in the design review.
3. T h e term “ language game“ is taken from Ludwig Wittgenstein s Philosophical

Investigations (New York: Macmillan Company, 1953).
4. Jeanne Bamberger and I invented this notion, and used it in our “Th e FiguralFormal Transaction“ , Division for Study in Research in Education, Working Paper,
M IT , 1978.

Chapter 4
1. Norman Zinberg, “ Psychiatry— A Professional Dilemma“ , in Daedalus (Fall,
1963).
2. Leston Havens, Approaches to the M ind , (Boston: Little, Brown, Inc., 1973).
3. Th e protocol discussed in this section was first recorded by two student research­
ers, in the course of a seminar on professional education which I conducted in 1978.
The two students— Bari Stauber and Mike Corbett— worked together with the psychi­
atric resident to collect the protocol and the interview material. Each of them wrote
a term paper on the protocol. Although my analysis departs from theirs in many re­
spects, I am indebted to them for the protocol and for their ideas.
4. Erik Erikson, “T he Nature of Clinical Evidence,“ in Daniel Lemer, ed., E vi­

dence and Inference (Glencoe, 111.: The Free Press of Glencoe, 1958), p. 74.
5. Ibid., p. 7$.
6. Ibid., p. 76.
7. Ibid., p. 89.
8. Ibid., p. 83.
9. Ibid., p. 87.
10. Ibid., p. 79.
11. Ibid., p. 80.
12. This term, first introduced by David Bakan, has been developed in Theory in

Practice, by Chris Argyris and Donald A. Schon (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1974).

360

Notes

C h a p te r 5
1. I am thinking here of Wittgenstein’s use of "seeing-as" (see Ludwig W ittgen­
stein, Philosophical Investigations (New York: Macmillan Company, 1953). In refer­
ence to examples such as "seeing the figure as a box" and "seeing the duck/rabbit
picture as a rabbit," Wittgenstein points out that seeing-as is at once, and ambiguously,
a process of seeing and thinking.
2. Thomas Kuhn, "Second Thoughts on Paradigms," in The Essential Tension
(Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press, 1977).
3. Ibid., p. 307.
4. This account of the logic of theory-testing experiment follows the lines set forth
by Karl Popper in his Conjectures and Refutations (New York: Harper & Row, 1968).
5. I have drawn this example from an article by J. C . ¡ones, "Feeding Behavior
of Mosquitoes," Scientific American 238 (June, 1978): 138-40.
6. Popper, Conjectures.
7. In Experience and Reflection (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press,
1959), E.A. Singer has propounded the thesis that scientific hypothesis ought to be
understood "in the imperative mood."
8. See Elton Mayo, The Human Problems o f an Industrial Civilization (New York:
MacMillan, 1933).
9. T h e idea of the relation of knower to known as a "transaction" derives from
the work of John Dewey. See A. F. Bentley and John Dewey, Knowing the Known
(Boston: Beacon Press, 1949).
10. T h e phrase is from Geoffrey Vickers, unpublished memorandum, M IT , 1978.
11. Lisa Peattie introduced me to this term.
12. See Michael Polanyi, Personal Knowledge (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1958).

Chapter 6
1. Nathan Glazer, “ Schools of the Minor Professions," Minerva , (1974): 348.
2. See William Schwartz and Stephen Pauker et. al., "Toward the Simulation of
Clinical Cognition: Taking a Present Illness by Computer," The American Journal

o f M edicine, 60 (June 1976): 991-996.
3. Harvey Brooks, "Dilemmas of Engineering Education," in I E E E Spectrum,
(February 1967).
4. W .I.B. Beveridge, The Art o f Scientific Investigation (New York: Random
House, 1957).
5. Richard Nelson, "T h e Link Between Science and Invention: T h e Case of the
Transistor," in The R ate and Direction o f Inventive Activity E conom ic and Social Fac­
tors, Universities-National Bureau Conference Series, No. 13 (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1962).
6. Ibid., p. 557.
7. Ibid., p. 562.

361

NOTES
8. Ibid.
9. Ibid., p. 563.
10. Ibid., p. 567.
11. Thomas Kuhn, “ Second Thoughts on Paradigms/’ The Essential Tension (Chi­
cago and London: University of Chicago Press, 1977), p. 305.
12. Ibid.
13. Robert Oppenheimer, “ Analogy in Science,” American Psychologist, 11, 3

(1956):»27-135.
14. Kuhn, “ Second Thoughts,” p. 306 (“both an appropriate formalism and a new
way of attaching its consequences to nature” ).
15. See my “Generative Metaphors in the Setting of Social Policy Problems,” in

Metaphor and Thought, Andrew Ortony, ed., (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1979).
16. Ibid. The example of the paintbrush, originally described in my Displacement
o f Concepts (New York: Humanities Press, 1963), originally occurred during my ten­
ure at Arthur D. Little, Inc., in Cambridge, Mass.
17. Dean Wilson, unpublished project report, 1977.
18. From a report of the Community Systems Foundation, Cali, Colombia, 1978.

Chapter 7
1. This summary of the history of the city planning profession is taken in large
part from Mel Scott, American City Planning Since 1890 (Berkeley, Cal.: University
of California Press, 1969).
2. See, for example, Herbert Gans, Urban Villagers (New York: T he Free Press,

1965).
3. Th e case study presented here is derived from videotapes and interview notes
originally collected by William Ronco, then a graduate student in the Department
of Urban Studies and Planning at M IT . I am grateful to Dr. Ronco for his help in
generating this material and for his contributions to earlier versions of its analysis. The
material presented in this article is substantially different from earlier treatments of
it, however, and the responsibility for it is entirely my own.
4. See Chris Argyris and Donald A. Schon, Theory in Practice (San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass, 1974).

Chapter 8
1. Frederick Taylor, Principles of Scientific Management (New York: Norton and
Co., 1967, first published 1911).
2. Henry Mintzberg, The Nature of Managerial Work (New York: Harper & Row,
1973).

362

Notes

C h ap ter 9
1. Thomas Kuhn has begun to explore the issue of translation across appreciative
systems of frames— he discusses it in terms of the predicament of translation across
scientific paradigms— in his “ Postscript” to The Structure of Scientific Revolutions,
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1962), Kuhn distinguishes between the “ per­
suasion” by which parties to a dispute may arrive at agreement, within a shared para­
digm, and the “conversion” by which scientists sometimes shift from one paradigm
to another.
2. Hannah Arendt, Thinking, Volume I of The Life of the Mind (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1971).
3. Reported by George Ball and Charles Bohlen, in David Halberstam, The Best

and the Brightest (New York: Random House, 1972).

Chapter 10
1. Ivan Illich, Deschooling Society, Vol. X L IV of the World Perspectives series,
Perennial Library, (New York: Harper & Row, 1970). But for a more scholarly version
of a similar argument, see Magali Larson, “ Professionalism: Rise and Fall,” in Interna­

tional Journal of Health Services, 9, 4 1979.
2. A view summarized in Paul Halmos, Professionalism and Social Change, The
Sociological Review Monograph 20, University of Keele, December 1973.
3. See, for example, John Van Maanan, “Observations on the Making of Police­
men,” Human Organization, 32, 4 (Winter 1973). 407-418.
4. Marie Haug, “ Deprofessionalization: An Alternate Hypothesis for the Future,”
in Halmos, Professionalism and Social Change.
5. Everett Hughes, “T h e Professions in Society,” in The Canadian Journal of Eco­

nomics and Political Science, 26, 1 (February i960): 54-61.
6. This term, first introduced by Samuel Taylor Coleridge to describe the stance
appropriate to the reading of poetry, has become commonplace in contemporary dis­
cussions of education.
7. Chris Argyris and Donald A. Schon, Organizational Learning (Reading, Mass.:
Addison-Wesley, 1978).
8. See Martin Rein and Sheldon W hite, “ Knowledge for Practice,” D S R E Work­
ing Paper, M IT , Cambridge, Mass., October 1980.
9. Leston Havens, Approaches to the Mind (Boston: Little, Brown, 1973).
10. See Nathan Glazer, “Schools of the Minor Professions,” Minerva, (1974).
11. Karl Mannheim, Ideology and Utopia (New York: Harvest Books, 1936).
12. See, for example, David Bloor,

Knowledge and Social Imagery, (London:

Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1976).
13. Havens, Approaches to the Mind.
14. Leston Havens, Participant Observation (New York: Jason Aronson, Inc., 1976).
15. See, for example, Gary Bellow,

The Lawyering Process (Mineola, N.Y.: T h e

Foundation Press, 1978).
16. Chris Argyris, The Inner Contradictions of Rigorous Research (New York: Aca­
demic Press, 1980).

3 ^3

NOTES
17. William Torbert, Creating a Community of Inquiry (New York: John Wiley
& Sons, 1976).
18. Britton Harris argues that formal optimization models are best treated as meta­
phors for planning decisions, in A Paradigm for Planning, forthcoming.
19. Chris Argyris and Donald A. Schon, ‘‘T he Role of Failure in Double-Loop
Learning," unpublished memorandum, 1979.
20. Israel Scheffler, “T he Cognitive Emotions," The Teachers College Record, 79,
2 (Dec. 1977): 171-18 6 .
21. Malcolm Parlett, “ Reflecting on Practice," manuscript, London, England, 1981.
22. See Barry Jentz and Joan Wofford, Leadership and Learning (New York: M c­
Graw-Hill, 1979).
23. Kevin Lynch has made this point in his recent proposals for an agenda of re­
search in urban design.
24. Max Weber, “ Bureaucracy," in Oscar Grusky and George A. Miller, eds., The

Sociology of Organizations (New York: Free Press, 1940), p. 7.
25. Ibid., p. 13.
26. This view, which has shaped most thinking about democracy in contemporary
political science, is presented, for example, in Seymour Lipset, Martin Trow, and
James Coleman, Union Democracy, (New York: Doubleday Anchor, 1956).
27. Israel Scheffler, The Language of Education (Springfield, 111.: C .C Thomas,

i960).
28. An example of such an educational technology is described at length in Seymour
Papert, Mindstorms: Children,

Computers and Powerful Ideas (New York: Basic

Books, 1981).
29. See Chris Argyris, “ Alternative Schools: A Behavioral Analysis," Teachers Col­

lege Record, 75, 4 (May 1974): 424-452.
30. See, for example, Samuel Bowles and Herbert Gintis, Schooling in Capitalist

America (New York: Basic Books, 1976).
31. This view of public policy formation as a process of rational choice has been
set forth, for example, in Richard Zeckhauser and Edith Stokey, A Primer for Policy

Analysis, (New York: Norton, 1978).
32. See, for example, Jeffrey Pressman and Aaron Wildavsky, Implementation
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1979).
33. Lipset et al, Union Democracy.
34. Milovan Djilas, The New Class (New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1974).
35. See Bernard Frieden,

The Environmental Hustle, (Cambridge, Mass.: M I T

Press, 1980).
36. There have been many studies in the 1970s which have observed and criticized
the ineffectiveness of the regulatory mechanisms set up in response to the advocacy
and protest movements of the 1960s. See, for example, Lawrence Bacow, Bargaining
for fob Safety and Health, (Cambridge, Mass.: M I T Press, 1980).
37. Mario Cuom o uses this phrase, and illustrates its application, in his Forest Hills

Diary (New York: Random House, 1974).
38. Martin Rein and I have argued this point in “ Problem-Setting in Policy Re­
search," in Carol Weiss, ed., Using Social Research in Public Policy Making (Lexing­
ton, Mass: D C . Heath, 1977).
39. See, for example, Peter Marris and Martin Rein, Dilemmas of Social Reform
(New York: Atherton Press, 1967).
40. Eric Trist, “ New Directions of Hope," Regional Studies, 13 (Elmsford, N.Y.:
Pergamon Press, 1979): 439-451.

364

Index

Aalto, Alvar, ooo, 78

Arendt, Hannah, 278, 280

accountability, 293, 295, 297, 345-46

Argyris, Chris, 226, 230, 304, 321; Inner

Ackoff, Russell, 16
action: dichotomy with thought, 275,
276-81; interpersonal theory of, 226,

Contradictions of Rigorous Research,

321-22, 353; Model I, 226-28, 230,
263, 303, 304-6, 335; Model II, 23034, 321-22; subject/object of, 191,
195-^03, 322-23» 347
action-present, 62, 279, 281
action science, 319-20, 323, 354
adaptability, 1 5 -16 , 171
affirmation, logic of, 155-56
agent-experient, 322-23, 347
agronomy, 42, 308, 325; as science-based
profession, 168, 169
Alexander, Chris, 77; Notes Toward a

Synthesis of Form,

319
art, artistry (in practice), 18, 19, 20, 34,
42, 48-49, 157, 271; in architecture
and psychotherapy examples, 130-32,
140; description of, 176 -77; of engi­
neering design, 1 7 1-7 6 , 188; of
managing, 241-54, 236-66; of scien­
tific investigation, 177-82, 188; in
situations of uncertainty, instability,
uniqueness, value conflict, 49, 50, 6 2 63, 69, 165, 170; in teaching, 6 5 -

66
artifact/idea coherence, 136, 164
avocation, 22

52-53

Alonso, William, 9, 10
analogy, 1 77-79 , 182-84; see also exem­
plars)

Bacon, Sir Francis, 31, 163

appreciative system, 132, 164, 166, 270,

Barber, Bernard, 8, 36

Approaches to the M ind (Havens), 313

Bardeen, J., 178, 188, 268
bargaining, 344; in town planning exam­

architecture, 76, 128-30, 268, 269, 312;
design in, 77-10 4 ; exemplars in, 316;

ple, 2 1 7 -1 8
Barnard, Chester,

275, 282, 328; constancy of, 272-73

media in, 128, 157-9; schools of (plu­
ralism), 7 7 -7 8 , 102, 272-3, 3 10 -11

239-40;

“ M ind in

Everyday Affairs/' 5 1-5 2
Bell, Daniel, 7

365

Index
343-45; of planning, 206-7; see a^°
problems, new

Bell Laboratories, 177, 178, 181, 268
Bernoulli, Daniel, 183
Bernstein, Richard, 48

consumer movement (example), 351

binary search, 190-91

control (norm), 133, 143, 163, 166; vi­
olated in hypothesis-testing, 149-50;

Birdwhistell, Ray L., 53
Bok, Derek, 29, 30

win/lose game, 303-6

Boulding, Kenneth, 189

counterprofessionals, 340-45, 349-50

Brattain, W ., 178

counterresearchers, 341

Brooks, Harvey, 1$; “ Dilemmas of Engi­

courts, 343-44

neering Education,“ 1 7 1-7 2
bureaucracy:

citizen-professionals

craft, 34, 48
in,

342-43; professionalization of, 326-

creativity, 182, 188; see also art, artistry
crises, national, 9-10 , 12-13

27; professionals in, 326-38, 339; pub­
lic school as, 331-32; technological ex­
tension of, 336-37
Burger, Warren, 13

Daedalus volume on professions (1963),

burn-out, 61; example of, 255-64
Bush, Vannevar, 37
business, 23

5-6, 7, 11, 36, 39, 106
democracy, 342; distorted in profession­
alization, 340

business education, 29-30; exemplars in,
316

deprofessionalization, 13; see also profes­

dentistry, 168, 308, 325
sions, demystification of
description (articulation), 63,

139-40,

172, 175, 182, 186, 276 -77, 321; of
children’s process of discovery in action

action, 279,281; lack of satisfactory, in

(block-balancing experiment), 56-59,

art of practice, 19-20, 42, 43, 49-50,

61, 147, 320-21, 322, 323

69, 126, 243-49; of reflection in ac­

citizen-professionals, 289, 294-95, 340,

340-43
client(s), 290-306; in reflective contract,
300-303, 306-7
clinical psychology, 106, 107
coercion, 340; potential for, 345-46
Cogwheel Experiment,
202, 272

189-90,

world in, 157-59, 162; language of,
8 0 -8 1,9 5 -9 7,10 3 ; media of, 271; nor­
mative domains of, fig. 3.2 (p. 96), 9 7 98, 99, 101, 103; paintbrush example,

191,

Colombia: malnourishment problem in,
191-202
common sense, 50-51, 54
competence, 19-20, 260-62
complexity, 14 -15 , 18-19, 39
Comte, Auguste, 32, 33
confirmation, logic of, 155
conflict: research-in-practice in, 308
conflict
settlement:
institutions of,

3 4 3 -4 4
consequences: in relation to intention,

153-56
consequences, unintended, 79, 94, 146,
150; in architecture and psycho­
therapeutic examples, 131-32, 134 36; of counterprofessional activity,

366

tion, 243-44, 266, 271
design, 52-53, 268; drawing as virtual

184-86, 188, 269; reflective, example
of, 79-104» 271» 27 2» 309» 311» 316,
347; as reflective conversation with sit­
uation, 76-104; science of, 46-47; seeing-as in, 184-87; see also engineering
design
design professions, 76 -79
Dewey, John, 65, 3571138
“ Dilemmas of Engineering Education”
(Brooks), 1 7 1-7 2
disbelief, willing suspension of, 296-97
disciplined subjectivity, 1 16 -17 ; see also
architecture, design in
distance (norm), 133, 163; violated in
hypothesis-testing, 149-50; in man­
agement, 266
divinity (profession), 8, 23 ,4 6,166 , 293-

9 4 » 312

Index
doctor/patient relationship,

293, 294,

295^6

forestry, 168
form (norm), 97

doing-as, 139, 140, 166

frame analysis, 309-15, 323
frame experiment(s) (frame-testing), 40,
41-4 2, 63, 165-66, 269, 309; see also
on-the-spot experiment
Fried, Mark, 208

eclecticism, systematic, 3 1 3 -1 4
education, 17, 23, 38-39; see also profes­
sional education
Ekroad, Kip, 196, 199, 200-201

Galileo, 183

electoral process, 343-44
Eliot, Charles William, 29

Gans, Herbert, 208
Glazer, Nathan, 168, 172; major/minor

ends, see means/ends
engineering, 14, 23,42, 308, 312, 325; as
applied science, 1 7 1-7 2 ; design profes­
sions in, 7 6 -77; as model of instrumen­
tal practice, 34, 38-39; as model of

professions, 23, 26-27, 45» 46, 47-48,
204, 293-94, 307, 308, 325
Great Society program, 348
Gustafson, James, 8

technical practice, 31; problem setting
and implementation in, 187-88; as
science-based profession, 168, 169
engineering design: art of, 171-7 6 ; devel­

Harris, Britt, 319-20

opment of transistor example, 177-82;

Harrison, Andrew, 51

gun-metal color process example, 1 7 2 76, 182, 268, 271, 273

Havens, Leston, 17, 106, 108, 310; Ap­

Enlightenment (the), 31
Erikson, Erik, 16, 108, 116 -18 , 136
error, uncorrectable, 304-6
exemplar(s),

138-39,

183-84,

269,

3 1 5 -1 7
experiment(s), 177; bounds of, in prac­
tice situation, 15 1-52 ; controlled,
143-44, 149-50, 151, 165; explana­
tory, 145; move-testing, 146 (see also
move[s]); reflection-in-action in, 32223; in Technical Rationality model,
141-45; in theory building, 181; see
also on-the-spot experiment

proaches to the Mindy 3 13 -14 ; Partici­
pant Observation 314
Harvard University: Law School, 316;
School of Business Administration, 29,

ji6
Hawthorne Effect, 149, 322

Higher Learning in AmericOy The
(Veblen), 35
Hobbes, Thomas, 31
Hofstadter, Richard, 6
Hughes, Everett, 4
Huyghens, Christian, 183
hypotheses, new, 181-82, 269

expertise, 326, 327, 337; move from, to

hypothesis testing, 146-47, 157, 166,
177, 269; in architecture and psycho­

reflective practice, 329-36, 345-54;
mystique of, 288-89, 304; professional

therapeutic examples, 149-56; confirmed/disconfirmed, 146-47, 150,

knowledge as, 339; in reflective prac­

166,

tice, 295-96, 298; required by counterprofessionals, 341; supplied by profes­
sionals in policy-making, 339-40, 342,

82

181; leads to invention,

181—

349; see also knowledge
exploration, 153, 156, 166

“ If you want to get ahead, get a theory"
(Inhelder
and
Karmiloff-Smith),

56-59
Illich, Ivan, 5, 288
failure, fear of, 321-22
Flexner Report, 28

industrial engineers, 77
industrialism, 32

367

Index
industry: as prototype of technical ratio­
nality, 336

self-reinforcing

system

of,

226-28,

235, 281-83; tacit, 60, 61, 62

Inhelder, Barbel, and Annette Karmiloff-

knowledge, 337-38; institutionalized in

Smith: “ If you want to get ahead, get

public school, 329-31, 334, 335-36;

a theory,” 56-59

specialized, 4, 5, 11, 22, 342, 344-45»
346; see also professional knowledge

Inner Contradictions of Rigorous Re­
search (Argyris), 319

knowledge industry, 6, 8

inquiry, 130, 170, 268-69, 317; in adver­

knowledge-in-practice, 69, 345; in plan­

sarial setting, 350-53; agents of, in

ning, 205-6, 208, 209; example of,

public policymaking, 349; cooperative,

210-28, 229, 235; therapeutic, 1 1 6 -

351-53;

fundamental

methods

of,

317-20; media as “stuff” of, 271; onthe-spot, 169-70; public, 297, 328,

*7
Kuhn, Thomas, 138-39, 140, 182-83,
188

336, 338, 350; reflection-in-action as
ethic for, 164; scientific, 33; stance to­
ward, 133, 144, 163-64
instability, see situations of uncertainty,
instability, uniqueness, conflict
interaction, therapeutic, 160-62

spatial action, 9 5 ,15 7; as virtual world,

interpretation (psychotherapeutic), 113—
14, 116 -18 , 120-24, 125-26
intervention (psychotherapeutic),
24, 125, 129

Langdell, Christopher Columbus, 28-29
language (professional), 270-72, 275;

1 5 7 -5 9
law, 7-8 , 13, 242, 340; exemplars in,

123-

315 -16 ; prototype of profession, 23
law education, 28-29

intuition, 182, 188, 239, 241, 265

lawyer/client relationship, 293, 294

invention, 181-82; seeing-as in, 184-87

learning sequence(s), 155, 158, 160, 232
learning systems, organizational, 242-43,
254, 265, 285, 527-28, 538, 345, 353;
limits of, 254-66; school as, 335-36
LeCorbusier, (Charles Jeanneret-Gris),

Jacobs, Jane, 208
Jamestown, N .Y., 353
Jentz, Barry, 323

78
Lewin, Kurt, 319, 320

John Hancock Building, Boston, 3571145
Johns Hopkins University, 35
Johnson, Lyndon, 348

“ Librarian, The: From Occupation to
Profession,” 25
librarianship, 23, 25
listening: psychotherapeutic, 117; reflec­
tive, 350
Lynn, Kenneth, 8

Kahn, Louis, 78
Karmiloff-Smith,

Annette,

Barbel

In­

helder and: “ If you want to get ahead,
get a theory,” 56-59
Kennedy, John, 6
Kemer Commission, 348
knowing, tacit, 49, 52, 53-54, 240
knowing/doing dichotomy, 165; see also
action, dichotomy with thought
knowing-in-action: converted to knowledge-in-action, 59; tacit, 49-54
knowing-in-practice: limits reflection-in­
action, 275; reflection in and on, 61,
62; self-limiting character of, 275-76;

368

management, 14, 268, 308; art of, 23666, 271; professional, 326; as sciencebased profession, 168; split in, 236-41,
243, 266, 273
management schools, 238, 240
management science, 237-39, 243; re­
flective, 266
Manhattan project, 37
Mannheim, Karl, 312
market phenomena:
(example), 244-45

interpretation of

Index
Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Teacher Project, 6 6 -6 8 ,299,321,329,

norms:

in managing,

266; in profes-

sional/client relationship, 292, 294,

303

334.336
means/ends, 40, 41; in Positivism, 3 3 34, 165; in problem setting, 46, 47; in
reflection-in-action, 68

Notes Toward a Synthesis of Form (Alex­
ander), 52-53
nursing, 168

media, 270 -72,27$; of architecture, 128,
157-59; of psychotherapy, 128; reper­
toire of, 158-59
mediation, professional, 344

objectivity (norm), 133,16 6, 273, 312; in
public schools, 330-31, 335; violated

Medicaid, 10

in hypothesis testing, 149-50

Medicare, 10
medicine, 7 ,1 3 ,1 4 , 3 1 ,4 1 -4 2 , 312, 325,
340; exemplars in, 3 16 -17 ; as model of
instrumental practice, 34; as model of

“ O n Teaching the Rudiments” (Tol­
stoy), 65-66
on-the-spot experiment, 63, 66,

166,

308-9, 320; in architecture and psy­

science-based technology, 38-39; pro­
totype of profession, 23, 28; research/-

chotherapy examples, 9 4 ,12 2 ,12 4 -2 5 ,

practice status in, 308; role frames, 311;
as science-based profession, 168-70

131, 132; and constancy of apprecia­
tive system, 272; evaluation of, 1 3 3 -

Mental Health A ct of 1964, 107
metaphor(s), 138, 279; generative, 18 4 -

Oppenheimer, Robert:

of Agreement

(experimental

method), 142, 143
Method of Concomitant Variations (ex­
perimental method), 142-44
M ethod

of

133, 141-56; in teaching, 335
operations research, 16, 37, 43, 238

87, 269, 319
meteorology, 168
M ethod

36; in managing, 265, 266; rigor in,

Difference

(experimental

method), 142-43
Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig, 78
Mill, John Stuart, 142, 143
ministry, see divinity (profession)
Mintzberg, Henry, 240
modelling, 4 3 -4 4 ,18 6 -8 7, 203; example,
272

“ T he Role of

Analogies in Science,” 183
optometry, 168
organizations, formal, 327-29; interpre­
tation of troubles in (example), 24650; restructuring of principles and val­
ues in, 335-36,338; school as, 331-32;
stability and predictability in, 327-29,
332, 338; see also learning systems, or­
ganizational
overlearning, 61
overload, 7 -8

Moore, Wilbert, 22, 24
move(s), 131, 151, 152, 164, 166, 269;
affirmed, negated, 146, 181; as experi­

Papert, Seymour, 279

ments, 157, 158, 160; and termination

Parlett, Malcolm, 323

of reflection, 280

Participant Observation (Havens), 314

move testing, 146, 153-55, 177
mystery/mastery, 126, 227, 229, 230,

233,262,304,305

philosophy of science, 48-49
Piven, Francis, 208
planning, 38-39, 268, 273, 3 11, 312;
evolving context of, 204-10
pluralism, professional, 17, 18 -19 , 4 1”
42, 129-30, 273, 3 10 -11; in architec­

Nader, Ralph, 351
National

Research

and

Development

Corporation, 37
Nelson, Richard, 177, 179, 180
New York C ity, 12

ture, 7 7 -7 8 ,1 0 2 , 272-73, 3 10 -11; dis­
cussion of, 3 12 -15 ; dilemmas inherent
in, 3 1 1 -1 2 ; in management, 236-41,
243, 266; in planning, 204-5; in psy­
chotherapy, 106-8

369

Index
133-36; in science-based professions,

Polanyi, Michael, 52, 240
policy analysis, 339, 341; see also public

170; social, 347-48, 349; technical,
187-88, 193

policy
politics: and policymaking, 339-40, 348;

problem solving, 18, 19, 24, 268; in con­
text of reflective inquiry, 69; exemplars

special interest, 341-42
Popper, Karl, 143, 146-47, 151

in, 138-40; through generative meta­

Positivism, 31-34, 39, 42, 46, 48-49,

phor, 186-87; as professional practice,
39-40, 41; stance toward inquiry in,

165-66
practice, 15 -19 , 33-34; art of, see art,
artistry (in practice); constants in, 270 -

133; technical, 21-22, 165, 168-70,
171-7 6 ; unanticipated consequences

(see also consequences,

75; experimental rigor in, 147-56; gap

of, 4, 9 -10

between professional knowledge and,

unanticipated); see also Technical Ra­

24, 45-49; hierarchical separation of

tionality (model)

research from, 23, 26-30, 3 5 -3 7 ,1 4 4 -

process(es), 318

4 5 ,1 4 7 ,14 9 ,15 2 ,1 6 5 ; mystery of, 278,

process-flow

282, 288, 304; in Positivism, 33-34;

modelling,

189,

190-91,

193-95, 201-2, 273; example, 269,

psychotherapeutic, 105-8; reflective,

309,318,320

see reflective practice; research and,

product designers, 77

165,307-25; science-based: Dean W il­

product

son example, 188-203; in Technical

250-64, 281-82, 327
professional advocates, 289, 294-95; see
also counterprofessionals

Rationality model, 39-40; term, 60;
virtual worlds in, 162; see also descrip­

development,

269;

example,

tion (articulation); reflecting-in-practice; rigor/relevance dilemma

professional autonomy, 337, 339; limits

practice, epistemology of, 36-37, 5 1-52,
69, 275; dominant, 21-30, 31, 42, 46,

to social mandate, autonomy, and li­
cense

on, 346; see also professionals, claims

48-49 (see also Technical Rationality

professional/client

/model/); and professional/client rela­
tionship, 292; reflection in action as,

302-3, 307, 345

133-67,

287,

345-54;

Technical

professional/client

contract,

292-99,

relationship,

287,

290-306, 339

com­

professional education, 5, 14-15; engi­

pared, 164-67; see also reflective prac­

neering, 1 7 1 -7 7 ; hierarchy of, 23, 3 5 37; see also professional schools

Rationality/reflection-in-action

tice
practitioners: collaborative mode with re­
searchers, 323-25, 339; order imposed

professional elites, 288-89, 34°» 342
professionalization, 4, 6 -7 , 37, 326-27

by, 163-64, 165; order imposed, in ar­

professional knowing, 165

chitecture example, 85, 92-94, 99,

professional knowledge, 22, 307, 340,

101,103, 131; technical, 44-45; trans­
actional relation to situation, 150-51;

345-46; adequacy of, 13 -15 ; and citi­
zen practitioners, 295; crisis of confi­
dence in, 3-20, 39; gap with practice,

see also professionals
primary inhibitory loop, 304-6

amples, 82, 85, 89, 90, 91, 93, 94-95,
102, 104, 119, 124, 129, 131-32, 141,
268-69
problem setting, 18, 19, 40-41, 47, 63,
165, 268; in architecture and psycho­
therapy examples, 129, 132, 137-38;

24, 45-49; in management, 240;
model of, 19 (see also Technical Ratio­
nality [model]); properties of, 23-24;
reflection-in-action as, 69; scientific
basis of, 23-30, 35, 48; as technical
expertise, 339 (see also expertise); see
also knowledge, specialized
professionals, 3 -6 ,10 ,4 5 -4 6 ; as agents of
society’s reflective conversation with
its situation, 353-57; in bureaucracy,

defined, 40; evaluating experiments in,

326-38, 339; claims to social mandate,

problem(s), 16, 47; new, 101, 166, 176,
177, 347; optimization, 47; reframed,
in architecture and psychotherapy ex­

37°

Index
autonomy, and license, 1 1 -1 2 ,1 3 ,2 8 8 ,
289-90, 291, 296-97, 298, 299, 340,
345-46; conflicts of values, goals, inter­
ests, 1 7-19 ; loss of faith in, 4 -5 , 9,
11-

276-81; on knowing-in-practice, 61,
62; leading to experiment and theory,
181; on reflection-in-action, 126, 127,
243, 263-64, 282; seeing-as, 182-87

13, 39; in public policymaking, reflection-in-action, 4 9 -6 9 ,14 1; architec­

339-42, 349, 350; self-criticism by,

ture design example, 77-10 4 ; cause

12-

and consequence of surprise, 328; com­

13, *8; self-serving, 340; as techni­

cal experts, 288

pared

professional schools, 31, 35-36, 46-47,

with

Technical

Rationality

(model), 164-67; as ethic for inquiry,

307-8, 324,325; curriculum of, 27-30;

164; examples of, 63-65; implications

see also architecture, schools of (plu­

of, as epistemology of practice, 28 7-

ralism)

354; limits to, 267, 275-83, 353; limits

professions: critique of, 5, 1 2 -13 , *4»
287-88, 290, 293, 294, 296-97, 298,

to, in management, 242, 244, 254-55,
264-66; limits to, in town planning ex­

312,340-42,344-46,349,356032;

ample,

defined, 22; demystification of, 288,

241-44, 263-66; within organizational

210,

228-34;

in managing,

289, 290, 340-41, 342, 344-45; essen­

learning system, 236-66; patterns and

tial to society, 3 -7, 8, 13, 39 (see also

limits of, across professions, 267-83;

professional knowledge); implications
of reflection-in-action for, 287-354; *n"

and professional/client relationship,
295-307; in psychotherapeutic exam­

stitutional context of, 274 -75,343-46;

ple, 105-27; reciprocal, 304-5, 306,

major/minor, 23, 24-26, 42, 46, 48,

350-51, 353-57; relation with techni­

204, 293-94, 307-8, 325; patterns and

cal problem solving: engineering de­

across,

sign example, 17 1-7 6 ; research on pro­

267-83; place of, in society, 338-54;

cess of, 309, 320-23; stance toward

scholarly literature on, 22; sciencebased, 168-203
psychiatry, 105-6, 312; schools of, 106-7
psychoanalysis, 106, 107
psychotherapy, 128-30, 268; example,
105-27, 273, 311; multiple schools of,
17, 310, 313, 314; storytelling as vir­
tual world in, 160-62
public interest: planning and, 206-7, 2°8

inquiry in, 163-64; structure of, 128 67; underlying process of, 102-4; when

limits of reflection-in-action

needed, 153, 156
reflection-on-action, 276, 277, 278
reflective conversation with situation,
151, 163, 164, 165, 167, 170; across
professions, 268, 272, 273, 274, 280,
281; in architecture and psychother­
apy examples, 130-32, 135, 136, 141,

of

148; engineering design as, 76-104,

professions in, 341-42; political con­
tention in, 342, 348-5»» 353» 354;
professionalization of, 339-42, 34 5-

172, 175 -76 , 188; in management,
242, 245, 265; in professional/client
relationship, 295-307; in psychother­

54; in reflective societal conversation,

apy example, 124-27; in public policy,

347-48; Technical Rationality model

346-47» 348, 349, 35°. 353i reflective
practice takes form of, 295
reflective practice, 295-307, 353; as alter­

public

policy,

39;

demystification

of, 339-40
public testing of private assumptions,
328; see also town planning, example

native to traditional epistemology of
practice, 345-54; and bureaucratiza­
tion of professional work, 337-38; in­

reality: construction of, 310, 311 ; descrip­
tions of, 346-47, 349; views of, 3 1 2 -

i?, 348,350
reflecting-in-practice, 59-69
reflection: interferes with action, 275,

stitutions for, 326-38; in science-based
professions, 168-203; see also reflec­
tion
regional planning, 76
Reich, Charles, 12
repertoire(s): of cases, maxims, materials:

371

Index
repertoire(s) (continued)
management, 265; constancy of, 270 72, 275; of examples and themes, 166;
of examples, images, understandings,

science, 7 ,3 3 ,3 7 -3 9 ; applied, 24 -25,4 2,
308» 3 2 5 » 339

Sciences of the Artificial The (Simon),
45

actions, 138, 141; of expectations, im­

scientific investigation: art of, 176-82

ages, techniques, 60, 66; of meanings,

scientific knowledge: applied in profes­

103, 119, 125-26, 132, 137-40
research: as basis of professional exper­
tise, 288, 289-90; dichotomy with

sional activity (requirement), 21, 22,
23-30, 31-32, 37-39; exclusivity of,
31-33; production of, 38; see also
Technical Rationality (model)

practice, 26-30, 35-37, 144-45, 147,
149, 152, 165, 169, 308; exposed as

scientific world-view, 31

rationalization for class interests, 340-

Scotch Tape (example), 245

41; on fundamental methods of in­

seeing-as, 139, 140, 141, 166, 182-87

quiry and overarching theory, 309,

selective attention, inattention, 61, 69,

317-20; implementation of, 341 (see

also science, applied); as process of re-

160
semiconductors (example), 177-78

flection-in-action, 309, 320-23; reflec­

Shils, Edward, 35

tive, 309-25; repertoire-building, 309,

Shockley, W ., 178-80

315- 17, 323

similarity, perceived, 140, 182-87, 203;

research-in-practice, 68-69, 298-301,
308-9; see also on-the-spot experi­
ment
research-practice

see also seeing-as
Simon, Herbert, 77,16 9 ; “diet problem,”
191; The Sciences of the Artificial, 45,

partnership,

323-25,

345
rigor, 141-56; virtual worlds in, 1 5 7 -

67
rigor/relevance dilemma, 42-43, 44-45,
47-49, 69, 308; in management, 24041; and science-based practitioners,
188
role, 130, 287; in planning, 204-6, 209,
210, 211, 234-35
role frame, 63, 190, 210, 270, 272, 275,
283, 310, 311, 315; constancy of, 274 75; town planning example, 211, 2 2 1 26, 227, 228, 233-34
“ Role of Analogies in Science, T h e” (Op­
penheimer), 183

46-47
situation: adapting to frame, 131, 190,
272 (see also town planning); transac­
tional relation with, 163-64, 165; see
also reflective conversation with situa­
tion
situations of uncertainty, instability,
uniqueness, conflict, 1 6 ,18 ,19 , 20, 39,
41, 42, 61, 62-63, 69» *64; action sci­
ence in, 319-20; artistry in, 49, 50,
165; decision under, 239; error rein­
forced in, 305; limit scope of technical
expertise, 345; professional patterns in
dealing with, 268; research-in-practice
in, 308; see also uniqueness
skills, 27-28, 30

Ronco, William, 323

social choice, rational, 341

Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 65
Rutstein, David, 13

social control: by professional elite, 107,

Ryle, Gilbert, 51

socialism:

288-90, 340
citizen-professionals

in,

3 4 2 -4 3
social planning, 206-9
social problems, 4, 9 -10 , 11, 12; model­
Scheffler, Israel, 329
Schein, Edgar, 24, 2 7,4 5-4 6 ,4 7-4 8 ,3 0 7
school, public: reflective practice/technical expertise in (example), 329-

36
Schultz, Alfred, 53

372

ling and, 44-45; scientific knowledge
used to solve, 37-38
social reform, 341, 342; professional ex­
pertise in, 344-45
social work (profession), 17, 23, 25-26,
j 8-39, 46,

107, 294, 3» 1, 312, 336

Index
society: place of professions in, 338-54

technology, 10, 15, 331

sociology of knowledge, 3 12 -13
special interest groups, 207,

theory, overarching, 152, 164, 166, 270,
208-9,

341-42
specialization, 60-61;

see also knowl­

edge, specialized

273-74, 275; research in, 317-20; use
in reflection-in-action, 274
theory building, 181
theory-in-use: error reinforced in, 305-6;

Sputnik, 39, 171

interpersonal, 283

statecraft, 32
status, 4, 23, 24-26, 37, 46, 172, 288,
303-4, 325, 340, 345; and professional/client relationship, 291, 29899; of psychoanalysts, 106-^7; see also
research, dichotomy with practice
storytelling: as virtual world in psycho­
therapy, 160-62

(see also action,

interpersonal theory of)
theory testing, 309
3M Corporation, 245
Three Mile Island, 12
Tolstoy, Lev Nikolayevitch, 68,313; “ O n
Teaching the Rudiments/’ 65-66
Torbert, William, 319
town planning, 23 ,76 , 204-35; example,

“stuckness” : in architecture and psycho­

271, 274, 281, 282, 309-10, 311

therapy examples, 93, 109-10, 118—

transference (psychotherapy), 118, 123,

19, 122-23, 124, 125, 127, 129, 131,

124 ,125; as virtual world, 16 0 -6 1,16 2
Trist, Eric, 353

134; as incentive

for

reflection-in-

action, 280
Sullivan, Harry Stack, 314
surfacing of dilemmas, 328, 334, 335-36,
338, 350; see also town planning, ex­

unions, professional, 13

ample
surprise, 56, 68, 327; reflection-in-action

uniqueness, 39, 41, 45-46, 61, 62-63,
68-69, 308; action science and, 3 1 9 -

is cause and consequence of, 328; trig­
gers reflection, 280
systems analysis, 189-203
systems engineers, 273
systems theory, 238

20; in architecture and psychotherapy
examples, 129, 132; artistry in, 49, 50,
165,170; bring past experience to bear
on, 137-40, 141; as domain of inquiry,
150; in management, 239, 265, 266;
practitioners of, in psychotherapy,
108-27; practitioner’s transactional re­
lation to, 150-51

Taylor, Frederick, 237, 238, 239

U.S. government: research spending, 38

Teacher Project, M IT , 66-68, 299, 321,

university(ies), 34-37, 324, 325; institu­

329,334.336
teaching, 293-94; reflective, 332-36
technical rationality, 338; industry as pro­
totype of, 336
Technical Rationality (model), 21-30,
5 0 ,6 9 ,18 8 ,28 7,28 8 ,319 ,34 0 ; aware­
ness of limits of, 37-49; compared
with reflection-in-action, 164-67; cri­
tique of, 288, 346; logic of experimen­
tal method in, 141-45; origins of, 30-

tionalization of Technical Rationality
in, 30-31; see also professions, institu­
tional context of
University of Chicago, 36
urban crime: as example of social prob­
lem setting, 347-48
urban planning, 8, 9, 76; metaphor in,
319-20
urban renewal, 10, 208, 340

37; place of professions in, 338-39;
science-based professions in, 168-69;
Technological Program, 31-32, 33, 34,

vagueness, 305-6, 343
values, 1 7 1-7 2 ; conflicting, 39, 42, 49,

37, 288, 346, 351; radical critics of,
340

50, 338; congruence of interpretive
systems with, 136, 141, 152, 317-18 ;

stance toward inquiry in, 163

373

Index
values (continued)
in

interpersonal

Wilson, A. H., 178
theory

of

action,

Wilson, Dean, 188-203; example, 1 9 1 -

226-27 (Model I), 231-32 (Model II);

20 3,2 6 9 ,2 71,2 72 ,2 73 ,2 74 ,3 0 9 ,3 18 ,

unintended consequences of, 135
Veblen, Thorstein, 6, 169, 238;

320

The

Higher Learning in America, 35-36

win/lose games, 303-6, 328
World Health Organization, 193

Vickers, Geoffrey, 53, 240, 322, 347

World W ar II, 37-38, 39, 43, 238

Vienna Circle, 32, 48

W right, Frank Lloyd, 74

virtual worlds, 157-62, 166, 271, 279,
281

Yasnaya Polanya (journal), 65
Watergate, 10 -11
Weber, Max, 326-27
Whitehead, Alfred North, 22

374

Zinberg, Norman, 106

