Ro~alCollii~rch
Paper
or
Artr{e

1

Volume 1 Num ber 1 1993/4

in Art an
.
her Frayling
Chr1stop

e

'The objects of the
College are to c;3dvance
learr11ng, knowledge and
protess1onal compf:!tence
Dart1cularly in the t1eld of
tine arts, in the principles
and pract1c:e ot art and
design in their relation to
industrial and commercial
P,rocesses and social
aevelopments and other
subjects relating thereto
through teaching, research
and collaboration with
industry and commerce.'
Charter of Incorporation of the Royal College of Art

28 July 1967

Royal College of Art
Kensington Gore
London SW7 2EU
United Kingdom
Telephone; 071-584 5020
Facsimile; 071-584 8217

ISBN 1 874175 55 1
@ Christopher Frayling and Royal College of Art 1993

Research in Art and Design
Christopher Frayling

There seem to be almost as many definitions of

Where artists, craftspeople and designers are concerned, the
word 'research' - the r word - sometimes seems to describe an
activity which is a long way away from their respective practices.
The spoken emphasis tends to be put on the first syllable -the re
- as if research always involves going over old territory, while art,
craft and design are of course concerned with the new. The
word has traditionally been associated with; I obscure corners of
specialised libraries, where solitary scholars live; I white-coated
people in laboratories, doing esoteric things with test-tubes;
I universities, rather than colleges; I arms length, rather than
engagement; I artyfacts, rather than artefacts; I words not deeds.
Recently an opposing tendency has emerged - largely as the
pragmatic result of decisions about government funding of
higher education - where the word has come to be associated
with: I what artists, craftspeople and designers do all the time
anyway; I artefacts, rather than artyfacts; I deeds not words.
Much of the debate - and attendant confusion - so far, has
revolved around a series of stereotypes of what research is, what
it involves and what it delivers. The debate has also led towards
some very strange directions indeed - such as the question
(asked in all seriousness) 'does an exhibition of paintings count
as research or doesn't it?' This paper attempts to unpack some
of the stereotypes, and redirect the debate away from some of
its more obviously blind alleys.

point, says the OED, is that the search involves

discovering new perspectives, or new

research flying around in higher education

care, and it involves looking for something

information, is actually a very recent

right now, as there are reasons for promoting

which is defined in advance: a criminal, a bed

formulation.

them. So I thought I'd go back to base - the

for the night, a regular musical theme. It isn't

OED. The Oxford English Dictionary lists two

about professionalism, or rules and guidelines,

except that it establishes that the word has

basic definitions, one with a little r and one

or laboratories. It is about searching.

traditionally been used of art (and, with a big

So the dictionary doesn't take us very far -

with a big R, and within these, many many

Research with a big R - often used in

R, of design), and that for an activity to count

subsidiary ones. Research with a little r -

partnership with the word 'development' -

in either sense as research the subject or object

meaning 'the act of searching, closely or

means, according to the OED, 'work directed

of research must exist outside the person or

carefully, for or after a specified thing or

towards the innovation, introduction, and

persons doing the searching. And the person

person' - was first used of royal genealogy in

improvement of products and processes'. And

must be able to tell someone about it. The

1577, then in one of the earliest detective

nearly all the listed usages, from 1900

dictionary also shows that prior to the turn of

stories William Godwin's Caleb Williams in

onwards, are from the worlds of chemistry,

the century the word research carried no

1794 (where it concerned clues and evidence),

architecture, physics, heavy industry, and the

specific scientific meaning - indeed it predated

then by Charlotte Bronte in 1847 to describe

social sciences. Research as professional

the division of knowledge into arts and

the search for overnight accommodation.

practice, which earns it the big R. And its

sciences.

Subsidiary definitions include 'investigation,

usage developed with the professionalisation

But we aren't, of course, talking about

inquiry into things; also a quality of persons

of research in the university sector and in the

definitions here: we're talking about usage,

carrying out such investigation' and, in music

chemical industry. In 1900, the word 'research'

and this is where the Humpty Dumpty principle

and poetry, 'a kind of prelude, wherein the

as applied to the humanities - for example -

comes in. In Alice Through the Looking Glass,

composer seems to search or look out for the

would have meant:

strains and touches of harmony, which he is to
use in the regular piece to be played
afterwards'. So research with a little r has been
used, in the last four hundred years, of art

• antiquarianism
• the study of constitutional documents

There's glory for you·, said Humpty Dumpty.

• a self-motivated activity funded by paid

'I don't know what you mean by 'glory' 'Alice said.

teaching or other occupation.

practice, of personal quests, and of clues and
evidence which a detective must decode. The

Humpty Dumpty has strong views about how
words come to mean what they do.

Humpty Dumpty smiled contemptuously. 'Of course
you don't - till I tell you. I mean 'there's a nice knock-

The concept of humanities research as

down argument for you!·'

'But 'glory' doesn't mean 'a nice knock-down
argument" Alice objected.
'When I use a word' Humpty Dumpty said, in rather a
scornful tone, 'it means just what I choose it to mean

- neither more nor less'
'The question is' said Alice, 'whether you can make

Matisse. But, he says, such reference materials

autobiography rather than understanding. The

should not be confused with research and in

movie stereotype of the artist is almost

any case, the point of the exercise is single-

invariably like this - from Michelangelo, played

mindedly to produce a finished painting. Only

by Charlton Heston (1965), or Caravaggio

the art historians - a breed of which he was

played by Nigel Terry in Derek Jarman's version

very suspicious - would think otherwise, after

(1986), to Ken Russell's biographies of more

'The question is' said Humpty Dumpty, 'which is to be

the fact. Yes, he had the spirit of research in

modern artists. And it is, I believe, shared by

master - that's all'.

him. But that was not his objective. Research

many outside our world. The question is, which

to the painter, he said, equals visual intention.

is to be master, that's all. As John A. Walker

He's a maker not a researcher - and he doesn't

has written:

words mean so many different things'

Which is to be master? Or,to put it another
way, where does the legitimation come from?
From a peer group, or an institution, or a

even feel comfortable verbalising about his
work.

funding structure, or an invisible College, or a
section of society at large? Is this a political
question, with a small p: about degrees and
validations and academic status, the colour of
peoples' gowns or, more interestingly, a
conceptual one, about the very bases of what
we all do in art, craft and design?
Assuming that a little more than politics
and money-raising are going on, I'd like to look
at some of the widely shared assumptions
which surround this debate - and, in unpacking
them, at the ways in which its terms can
perhaps be adjusted to be of more practical
use.
And I'd like to start with Picasso's painting

The work may be ambiguous - even in
1923, there were squabbles about what it

'the idea that art might be a construction

rather

than an expression, or that it might be the

,

consequence of a host of social factors, is alien to the
ethos of Hollywood.'

could possibly mean - but the artist isn't in the
business of unambiguous communication. To

It is unthinkable, he adds, that there could ever

adapt Herbert Read's famous distinction about

be a popular movie about a non-expressive

art education, this is research for art, rather

artist such as Piet Mondrian.

than either research into art or research
through art, if indeed it is research at all. I will

Moving on to the designer, up until
relatively recently the popular stereotype was

be elaborating on these distinctions a little later

rather different. Instead of the expressive artist,

on.

we have the pipe-smoking boffin who rolls up
But there's an even more dramatic

his sleeves (always his, incidentally) and gets

moment, which neatly illustrates several

down to some good, honest hands-on

popular assumptions about the artist's relation

experimentation. From Leslie Howard in The

to his or her own practice - about how art

First of the Few (1942), to Michael Redgrave in

happens. It is from a 1956 Hollywood film

The Dam Busters (1955). The designer-boffin's

called Lust for Life, and it involves Kirk Douglas,

very best moment of donnish understatement

sporting an orange beard, batting off some

came in The Dam Busters, when the man from

in painting. To find is the thing. Nobody is interested

crows above a wheat-field in the South of

the ministry says to Dr. Barnes Wallis (Michael

in following a man who, with his eyes fixed on the

France.

Les Demoiselles d'Avignon.
'In my opinion' said Picasso, 'to search means nothing

ground, spends his life looking for the pocket-book
that fortune should put in his path ..

In this sequence, Vincent van Gogh played

Redgrave): 'Do you really think the authorities
would lend you a Wellington bomber, for

by Kirk Douglas, is impetuous, anti-rational,

tests? What possible argument could I put

Among the several sins that I have been accused of

inward looking - and convinced that he is on

forward to get you a Wellington?' To which

committing, none is more false than the one that I

an impossible quest to express what is on his

the boffin replies 'Well if you told them I

of research. When I paint, my object is to show what

mind, or in his mind's eye. He's white, male

designed it, d'you think that might help?' Cut

I have found and not what I am looking for. In art

and quite barmy. He can't talk about his art -

to Barnes Wallace in the cockpit of a

intentions are not sufficient and, as we say in Spanish,

'it's impossible' is the best he can do - and he

Wellington ...

have, as the principal objective in my work, the spirit

love must be proved by facts and not by reasons .

works very fast - just look at the way he paints

Doing is designing for these people - not

The idea of research has often made painting go

all those crows, and creates his stormy sky of

systematic hypotheses, or structures of thought

astray, and made the artist lose himself in mental

turbulent dark blue. The resulting picture

or orderly procedures; but potting-shed, hit-

becomes yet more evidence of his mental

and-miss, sorry I blew the roof off but you

those who have not fully understood all the positive

disturbance, which itself is evidence of

know how it is darling, craft-work.

and conclusive elements in modern art and has made

something called his 'artistic temperament':

lucubrations. Perhaps this has been the principal fault
of modern art. The spirit of research has poisoned

them attempt to paint the invisible and, therefore, the
1

More recently, there's been a change in the

Crows over a Wheatfield (in Auvers) is,

popular image of the designer - reflected in

according to the film, completed at great

assorted television advertisements of the late

speed just moments before he tries to shoot

1980s which show young designers at work or

himself - in the summer of 1890; actually, this

play. The designer is no longer a boffin but is

wasn't his last canvas, but pop history has

now a solitary style warrior who knows his (still

unpaintable.'

In this rare interview of 1923 (one of only a
few he ever gave for publication), Picasso is in
part describing the reference materials he had
used when preparing Les Demoiselles
d'Avignon of 1906-7. Visual memories of the

red-light district of Barcelona, some ancient
Iberian sculptures he'd seen in the Louvre,
Cezanne's Mont-Sainte-Victoire, a recent

2

always preferred to believe that it was. The

it is usually his) way around the inner city

artist, by definition, is someone who works in

jungle, and who believes in an aesthetic of

an expressive idiom, rather than a cognitive

salvage, or junk.

one, and for whom the great project is an
extension of personal development:

The young designer has become an
imagineer - an archeologist of images, and

signs, and styles from within the urban

'touches her arm'). But on the whole, the

with research, the scientist (whose research

wasteland. Not a creator of meaning so much

psychopaths have won the day. The earliest

expertise has until recently been taken for

as an intuitive searcher after the latest thing.

animated story films, made by Georges Melies

granted) has exactly the same problem with

Don't think twice, it's alright. I'm reminded of

in the first decade of this century, featured

creativity - which is generally seen as the

the designer who was overheard on a bus,

explorers and scientists as manic, top-hatted

prerogative of the artist rather than the

saying 'let's be philosophical about this, don't

music-hall turns, belonging to something called

scientist. This is partly why the process of

give it a second thought'.

the Institute of Incoherent Geography. Since

discovering has been virtually ignored until

then, it's been estimated that mad scientists or

recently, and why the activity of fine art is of

expressive artist, the boffin and the style-

their creators have been the villains of 31 % of

increasing interest to historians of science.

obsessed designer, we have the popular image

all horror or fantasy movies worldwide, that

Look at The Double Helix: it could almost be

of the research scientist, and how he or she

scientific or psychiatric research has produced

an artist's autobiography.

works. My third public image. And it is almost

40% of the threats in all horror and fantasy

Now, side-by-side with the image of the

If the stereotype of the scientist as

at the opposite extreme to the mad artist and

movies - and - by contrast - that scientists have

researcher needs some adjusting - to make it

the trendy designer.

only been the heroes of 11 % of horror movies.

seem closer to art and design (though by no

The research scientist is orderly, he - again,
it tends to be he, in popular images - has

So it is saints and sinners.

means identical with it) - the popular image of

The saints have a self-evidently 'scientific'

the fine artist needs a lot of work as well. For,

conjectures and hypotheses and he sets about

way of thinking, they tend to say 'Eureka!',

in the history of art since the Renaissance,

proving or disproving them according to a set

and their successes instantly persuade the

there are of course countless examples of

of orderly procedures. His subject exists outside

scientific community around them of the

artists who have explored their materials for

himself, so he must submerge his subjectivity

wisdom of their ways. It all seems so simple.

what they are, and not simply as 'raw

and personality in order to study it. He takes a

And yet, of course, critical rationalism, which

materials'. Who have worked in a cognitive

problem, makes tentative conjectures

relies on making everything explicit, by

rather than an expressive idiom. George

regarding the answer to it and keeps revising

revealing the methods of one's logic and

Stubbs's researches on animal anatomy -

the answer in the light of neat, well ordered

justifying one's conclusions, and which has at

involving portfolios of drawings of dissections,

experiments, which must be repeatable or

the heart of its enterprise a belief in clarity, has

which were also used by scientists - made

replicable. He is what is known as a critical

been under considerable theoretical attack in

possible George Stubbs's animal paintings and

rationalist.

the last 10-15 years. Sociologists such as Harry

they have lived on in parallel with the pictures.

Collins, in his book Changing Order and

John Constable's researches into cloud

depictions of true-life scientists, rather than

philosophers such as Paul Feyeraband, have

formation - his many cloud drawings and

fictional or fantasy ones. Studies of the image

stressed that in science - as in everything else -

paintings - made possible John Constable's

of the scientist in pop culture have shown how

there may well be conjectures but many of

landscape paintings. This is not to suggest that

Interestingly, this stereotype exists in pop

fictional scientists tend on the whole to be

them are unconscious and they tend to be

Stubbs and Constable were, respectively, vet

something else: lunatics, or alcoholics, or

changed or modified without any explicit

and weatherman, but that they operated quite

psychopaths, or obsessives of some description

discussion, and they tend to involve a

consciously - in a cognitive idiom, researching

- I suppose Ors Frankenstein, Faustus, Jekyll

significant measure of subjectivity. In other

subjects which existed outside themselves and

and Strangelove are the prime examples - while

words, the Edward G. Robinson version of

their own personalities. In this century, one

real-life scientists in films tend on the whole to

research doesn't much resemble what science

could cite artists who explore the doors of

be impossibly saintly, incredibly generous,

looks like in the laboratory, or what it feels like

perception such as op artists - or computer

unbelievably humanitarian, and very often

to those who are doing it. Changing Order,

artists - or artists as semiologists - as their heirs

martyrs to their staggeringly effective research

according to Harry Collins, involves irrationality,

in this sense. Research for art and sometimes

as well - I suppose Edward G. Robinson as Dr.

craftsman's knowledge, negotiating reality

research through art, to re-use the distinction.

Ehrlich, the Nobel-prizewinner who discovered

rather than hypothesising about it, above all

One problem is, that the classic examples of

a cure for syphilis in Dr Ehrlich's Magic Bullet

tacit knowledge rather than propositional

this - Leonardo, Stubbs, Constable - date from

(1941), or Greer Garson as Marie Curie in

knowledge (and when there is propositional

a long time ago. Their drawings would be

Madame Curie (1943) or Mickey Rooney as

knowledge, a fair amount of tacit knowledge is

unlikely to be at the cutting edge of such

young Thomas Edison and Spencer Tracey as

in there, too). In the history and philosophy of

research today, in the era of electron-

the grown-up one, are the classics. Edward G.

science, historians such as David Gooding -

microscopes and other ways of enhancing the

goes out with an exhortation to the people in

who studies the methods of Michael Faraday -

image.

the 1 & 9s to 'rid men's hearts of the diseases

are now stressing the links between

of hatred and greed', while Madame Curie at

experimental scientists and creative artists

the very moment of her scientific discovery

(through the joint uses of imagination, intuition

turns to husband Walter Pigeon and says

and craft practice), especially in the nineteenth

'Pierre - do you mind? You look first' ('He

century. Where the artist has difficulty

smiles understandingly' says the script, and

persuading people of the connection of art

As Tom Jones has written:
'While Leonardo da Vinci's drawings pioneered

anatomical research, any work an artist does now in
this vein can only be reference material, the study of
anatomy having progressed far beyond what can be
observed by the unaided eye. Additionally, the
medical skills now required are so specialised that they

3

are unlikely to be possessed by any artist. Indeed,
given current scientific understanding, it is difficult to
conceive that much research into subject-matter (in

whole range of attitudes towards the use of

for the research and methods tradition in

reference materials and procedures and mental

design, or indeed for the tacit use of those

the sense in which it has been defined relative to

attitudes - but, again, in the light of history. In

methods by designers - to say nothing of

Stubbs, Constable and Leonardo da Vinci) is possible

a sense, the concept of design as research -

applied semiotics. I once asked an eminent

either applied research, where the resulting

advertiser, while I was making my television

3

nowadays.'

It is much more likely to be a matter of
referencing the subject or illustrating it in ways
that photography cannot achieve.
Nevertheless, the examples show;
• that artists have worked just as often in
the cognitive idiom as the expressive
• that some art counts as research -

knowledge is used for a particular application,

series The Art of Persuasion, for Channel 4

or action research, where the action is

about his line on the science of semiotics. 'Oh',

calculated to generate and validate new

he said 'that. That's what I do for a living!'

knowledge or understanding, or even (but very

Equally, the popular image of the art and

rarely) fundamental research - is so well

design student ignores those important

established that it doesn't need elaborating

moments in our history when research - in

here. But popular assumptions about design -

anyone's definition - was a central part of the

and indeed some of the self-images of

curriculum.

anyone's definition

designers - do live on. And what's less well

By the same token, the popular image of

• that some art doesn't.

known, is the fact that if you examine the

the scientist - as critical rationalist, engaged in

origins of art and design teaching in Britain,

fundamental research and shouting things like

It is a relief to discover that there's no question
of giving every single painter since the
Renaissance an honorary Ph.D., in absentia.
Whatever definition we end up with, it can
never in my view - in principle or in practice fit all fine art activities. Why should it? If
Picasso had wanted a doctorate of philosophy,
I'm sure he would have registered for one.
Instead he is said to have turned down
honorary degrees all over the western world.
There must be an institutional, or pedagogical,
or academic, or technical, or some reason for
wanting to do research. Not just status,
promotion and fund-raising.
To illustrate this, here's a famous quotation
from John Constable, to set against the Picasso
statement I quoted earlier. The quotation is
from a lecture to the Royal Institution in May
1836:

you'll probably see that 'research' as a problem

'Eureka' or 'it's a crazy idea but it just might

area, or as something which exists outside

work' - the image against which a lot of

studio design, is, again, a relatively recent

research tends still to be judged, is equally

phenomenon. Let's take your average design

wide of the mark. Doing science - as opposed

student at the government school of design in

to post-rationalising about science - just

London from the late 1840s to the 1860s.

doesn't seem to be like that, if recent

Already, art and design had been separated

researches into the philosophy and sociology of

from the mainstream university sector - in

science are any guide. Doing science is much

1836, they were poised to go in, but the

more like doing design.

Mechanics Institute-style model was adopted
instead - but the curriculum was based to a
large extent on formal rather than tacit

'the practitioner'. As if action which follows

knowledge, and on design as a kind of

reflection, or reflection which follows action,

language. You learned the grammar - from

can be put in a box exclusively marked

books by Owen Jones, or papers by Gottfried

'practice'. Research is a practice, writing is a

Semper - and, if you were very lucky, you then

practice, doing science is a practice, doing

learned the usage as well. But in studying the

design is a practice, making art is a practice.

grammar - with reference to other grammars,

The brain controls the hand which informs the

such as those of botany and sometimes physics

brain. To separate art and design from all other
practices, and to argue that they alone are in a

'I am here on behalf of my own profession, and I trust

and mechanics - you were given access to the

it is with no intrusive spirit that I now stand before

very latest research into the design process. It

different world, is not only conceptually

you; but I am anxious that the world should be

wasn't doing versus thinking. It was practice as

strange, it may well be artecidal (to use Stuart

painting. I hope to show that ours is a regularly taught

an amalgam of the two, with, if anything, the

Macdonald's word). Yes, art and design have

profession; that it is scientific as well as poetic; .

emphasis on the thinking. Time enough to

been taught separately from the mainstream,

and to show by tracing the connecting links in the

implement the thoughts after leaving College,

ever since 1837. But that is an institutional

it was thought.

accident, not a conceptual statement.

inclined to look to painters for information on

history of landscape painting that no great painter
was ever self-taught .. Painting is a science, and

So, where does all this lead? Apart from to

should be pursued as an inquiry into the laws of
nature. Why, then, may not landscape be considered
as a branch of natural philosophy, of which pictures
are but experiments?'

4

If the stereotype of the artist is fairly wide of
the mark, the recent image of the young
designer - descended from the image of the art
student in general, which was invented as
recently as the 1950s - also needs substantial
readjustment. Not just in the light of what we
know about design research, the design
methods movement, basic design, and the

4

Implicit in much of what I've been saying, is
a criticism of yet another stereotype - that of

the important thought that 'research' is a
To recapitulate:

much less diffuse, much more convergent

The popular image of the fine artist as

activity than the terms of the recent debate

expressive lunatic does not allow sufficiently for

would suggest. And that 'research' has been,

the cognitive tradition in art - a tradition which

can be and will continue to be an important -

has in fact been called 'research'. Nor does it

perhaps the most important - nourishment for

allow for the fact that art happens in a social,

the practice and teaching of art, craft and

technical and cultural world.

design.

The popular image of the designer as style

There is a lot of common ground. There is

warrior - superficial, trendy, obsessed with

also a lot of private territory. I'd like to finish

surfaces and signs - does not allow sufficiently

with the three categories (derived from Herbert

At the College, we give Higher Doctorates

Read) with which I began, to make some

from the gathering of reference materials.

practical suggestions as to the kinds of

Kenneth Agnew has recently and wisely

or Honorary Doctorates to individuals with a

research which might suit, indeed grew out of,

written that research through the design of

distinguished body of exhibited and published

what we actually do;

products has been

work - but we do not at present offer research

• Research into art and design
• Research through art and design
• Research for art and design

'hindered by the lack of any fundamental

degrees entirely for work where the art is said

documentation of the design process which produced

to 'speak for itself'. Rightly or wrongly, we

them. Too often, at best, the only evidence is the

tend to feel the goal here is the art rather than

object itself, and even that evidence is surprisingly

the knowledge and understanding. The Picasso

ephemeral. Where a good sample of the original

Research into art and design is the most

product can still be found, it often proves to be

philosophy. And we feel that we don't want to

straightforward, and, according to the Allison

enigmatic'.

be in a position where the entire history of art

s

is eligible for a postgraduate research degree.

index of research in art and design - as well as
CNAA lists of the 1980s and early 1990s plus
my own experience at the Royal College of Art
- by far the most common:
• Historical Research

These types of research resemble Herbert

There must be some differentiation.

Read's 'teaching through art' - so long as we're
clear about what is being achieved and

• Research into art and design

communicated through the activities of art,

• Research through art and design

craft or design. At the Royal College ofArt, this

• Research for art and design

• Aesthetic or Perceptual Research

kind of research, sometimes known as the

• Research into a variety of theoretical

degree by project - with a specific project

perspectives on art and design - social,

declared in advance of registration - involves

The novelist E.M. Forster's aunt once said to
Forster:

economic, political, ethical, cultural,

for the MPhil studio work and a research

'How can I tell that I think till I see what I say?'

iconographic, technical, material, structural .

report, and for the PhD studio work plus a

That seems to me to be very like the first

... whatever.

more extensive and substantial research report .

category. If we modify this to

That is research into art and design. At the

The thorny one is _Research for art and

College, it involves PhD theses or MPhil

design, research with a small 'r' in the

dissertations. And it is straightforward, because

dictionary - what Picasso considered was the

there are countless models - and archives -

gathering of reference materials rather than

from which to derive its rules and procedures.

research proper. Research where the end

Research through art and design which

'How can I tell what I think till I see what I make and
do?',

then we've covered the second category as
well. But if we modify it further to
'How can I tell what I am till I see what I make and

product is an artefact - where the thinking is,

do?'

accounts for the next largest category (though

so to speak, embodied in the artefact, where

a small one) in the Allison index, the CNAA

the goal is not primarily communicable

documents, and my own experience of degrees

knowledge in the sense of verbal

by studio project at the College, is less straight-

communication, but in the sense of visual or
iconic or imagistic communication. I've

knowledge. I can only add, that research for

forward, but still identifiable and visible.

mentioned the cognitive tradition in fine art,

art, craft and design needs a great deal of

• materials research - such as the titanium
sputtering or colorization of metals projects

and that seems to me to be a tradition out of
which much future research could grow: a

that we don't need to be scared of 'research' -

successfully completed in the metalwork and

tradition which stands outside the artefact at

or in some strange way protected from it - the

jewellery departments at the College and
Camberwell, in association with Imperial

the same time as standing within it. Where the

debate can really begin.

College of Science & Technology (partner-

interesting question is why people want to call
it research with a big 'r' at all. What's the

ships are very useful, in this area of research).
• development work - for example.customising

it seems to me we have a fascinating dilemma
on our hands. As much about autobiography
and personal development as communicable

further research. Once we get used to the idea

expressive tradition is concerned, one

motivation? True, research has become a

a piece of technology to do something no-

political or resource issue, as much as an

one had considered before, and communi-

academic one. And, as a slight digression, it

cating the results. A recent example: the

always amuses me to see the word 'academic'

Bibliography
1
Pablo Picasso: an interview (reprinted from The Arts,
New York, May 1923, in Artists on Art, ed. Robert
Goldwater & Marco Treves, John Murray, London,
1985, pp.416-7)

Canon colour photocopier at the Royal

used as a pejorative - by people who

College of Art, successfully used by some

themselves earn their livings within the

2

postgraduate illustration students, who have

academy. Research has become a status issue,

University Press, 1993, p.46).

both exhibited and written up the results.

as much as a conceptual or even practical one.

3

• action research - where a research diary tells,

And that - I must confess - worries me.

in a step-by-step way, of a practical

John A. Walker: Art & Artists on Screen (Manchester

Tom Jones: Research in the Visual Fine Arts
(Leonardo, 13, 1980 pp 89-93)
John Constable: Lecture notes, May 26 & June 16

4

experiment in the studios, and the resulting

There may well be opportunites for research
within the expressive tradition, but they need

report aims to contextualise it. Both the diary

dispassionate research rather than heated

5

and the report are there to communicate the
results, which is what separates research

discussion about status, class and reverse
snobbery.

argument for a new research culture in design

1836 (in Artists on Art, op.cit, pp.270-273)
Kenneth Agnew: The Spitfire: Legend or History? An

(Journal of Design History, 6, 2, 1993, pp.121-130).

5

Ro~alCollege

of Art Research Papers

